NOTE: OCR text of J. N. Farquhar, The Crown of Hinduism (1913), Internet Archive thecrownofhindui00farquoft, assigned pages only. {n} = printed page; [FOOTNOTE] marks footnotes. Raw OCR, lightly cleaned: expect scanning errors. Grade students on the Spanish reader and the printed pages, never on OCR artifacts.

=== Introduction (starts on p. 26)

{26}

III. The position which the thoughtful, modern Christian takes up towards other religions may be expressed under the following four heads.

A. There is a certain underlying unity in all religions as there is in the manifestations of every other human function. The human heart and mind arc the same everywhere. Hence there is something which links the lowest religion to the highest. There are gleams of light, suggestions of truth, in the most degraded faith. There is an identity which persists throughout the myriad forms which religion takes.

Further, each religion has been of value to the men who have professed it. Every religion has given its followers at least the idea of duty and of the community, and usually also the idea of God and of worship. There has never been a religion that did not uplift men, that did not bring them nearer God.

Yet even that does not express the whole truth. The religion of a savage is the very highest thing he knows, how ever gross it may be. In its activities his soul reaches its highest exercise. Hence we must recognize that, through his gross religion, the savage can reach God —

That the savage hands and helpless, Groping blindly in the darkness, Touch God's right hand in that darkness And are lifted up and strengthened.

As the writer once heard a good man say in a public meeting, ' Religion must be a very simple thing in God's eyes ; otherwise the simple folk of the world would have no chance at all ! ' We must believe that it is possible for every human being, no matter what his circumstances may be, to find his way to God, if he truly use all the light he has.

{27}

Otherwise, the relation of Father and child does not exist in his case. So the very foundation of Christianity demands this acknowledgement. Our belief in Christ leads to the same truth ; for we hold Him to be

the light which lighteth every man ; ! and we believe that even in savage minds God

left not himself without witness ; 2 and that the very lowest men

show the pith of the law written in their hearts.3

Thus through the grossest religion there is a path to God.

Christianity frankly acknowledges that a man may be acceptable to God in any religion. This is stated in the clearest possible language by Peter:

Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons : but in every nation he that feareth him, and worketh righteousness, is accept able to him.4

The ladder from earth to heaven is there for the lowest savage as well as for Jacob and the modern man.

B. The condition under which a man reaches God is utter sincerity, the turning of his whole soul toward the light, the frank acceptance of truth into his heart, straightforward obedience to the very highest he knows. It is this pose of the soul that opens it to heavenly influences, that makes it possible for our Father to enter into personal fellowship with His child. Without this attitude, there can be no true religion anywhere. Beyond this no man can go, however narrow or however wide his knowledge, experience, and opportunities may be. This law then applies to men in every religion.

Take the case of a savage who has been living a faithful life, in accordance with his light, in a coarse cannibalistic religion. He hears Muhammadanism preached, feels the

[FOOTNOTE] 1 John 1, 9. 2 Acts 14, 17. s Romans 2, 15.

[FOOTNOTE] * Acts 10, 34, 35. Cf. also Paul's words, Rom. 10, 12.

{28}

reasonableness of monotheism, the pressure of the doctrine of judgement on his conscience, the high moral value of the ethics of Islam. But, for various reasons, he continues his old life and the practice of cannibalism. What is the in evitable result ? The religion through which he formerly received help is no longer of any use to him. He has seen truth and has refused to obey it. He is no longer a religious man.

So, when a polytheist, coming in contact with Christianity, realizes the folly of idolatry, and feels that the cross and the love of Christ are just what he needs for the transformation of his sin-stained soul and life ; if he fail to confess Christ publicly ; if he shrink back from acting upon this revelation of religious truth in his inner life ; if he continue to bow down to idols; his old faith, however valuable it may have been to him formerly, can never be for him a door into fellowship with God again ; for he has turned his back upon the highest, and has made the great refusal.

C. Christians acknowledge fully the great and good work that has been done by each of the great religions. We gladly recognize that, in them, many saints have been trained, thousands of homes have been purified and uplifted, and multitudes of men and women have found God. We rejoice in the true and fruitful religious experience of these good men. We also recognize that in each of these religions men and women are still being trained in goodness and lifted nearer God. These are the facts on which people in Europe and America and educated non-Christians insist, when they demand that missionaries shall cease to make converts to Christianity. We acknowledge them and thank God for them.

We go still farther : we gladly confess that these great and good results prove the presence of truth in each of these systems :

By their fruits ye shall know them. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles ? l

[FOOTNOTE] 1 Matt. 7, 16.

{29}

When, however, certain of our friends go one step farther and say, ' Thus, all these religions are true,' we call a halt, and ask them to state more definitely what they mean. Do they mean to say that each is true in part, or that each is wholly true? that each contains a considerable amount of truth, or that each is the very truth of God ? Clearly it can be only the former ; for these great religions contradict each other very seriously on many points. Thus we agree with our friends completely, when they say, 'All these religions are good and helpful because each contains much truth.'

D. It is now necessary to take a look at the points on which the great religions contradict each other; and, in order to make our exposition as clear as possible, we shall restrict ourselves to the great quaternion, Hinduism, Buddhism, Christianity, Muhammadanism. These will provide quite sufficient material and illustration. Hinduism teaches that every soul is born and dies many times ; Christianity says,

It is appointed unto man once to die, and after this cometh judgement.1

Buddhism agrees with Hinduism on this point, but con demns Hindu literature, priests, and sacrifice, and sets forth the Buddha as the omniscient and infallible teacher for all men. Christianity teaches that God is the Father of men, that His Son became incarnate to reveal the Father and to die for the sins of the world, that He is the ideal for all men, and that His moral and spiritual teaching is necessary for all men. Muhammadanism, agreeing with Christianity that men are born and die once, denies all the affirmations of Christianity, and proclaims Muhammad as the last and greatest Prophet and the Koran as the eternal utterance of God. These oppositions and contradictions are as abrupt and definite as they can well be, and there are many more, quite as clear-cut and irreconcilable. The differences between the great religions are by no means small.

[FOOTNOTE] 1 Heb. 9, 27.

{30}

Let us now place beside these facts the contention that the great religions are all so noble and so great that we ought not to make odious distinctions among them, but should recognize them as a band of brothers. Clearly this contention can be maintained only on the ground that the differences between the religions are negligible. They may be regarded as negligible from different points of view. The atheist and the agnostic, acknowledging the value of the moral teaching of the various systems, put aside the differences between them as so much mythology. Many a humble man says, ' I believe my own religion is true ; but I recognize that a Hindu or a Muhammadan feels in the same way ; and so I think it best not to meddle with questions which I cannot settle, when there is so much good in each system ; ' some few plead for peace on the ground that the inner spirit of all the great religions is the same ; while many a modern student is inclined to say, ' I cannot see into the other world : I do not know the truth on the great subjects of the nature and character of God, the coming of men to birth, and their destiny after death. Why should we dogmatize ? Let each religion do all the good it can. We shall study all and sympathize with all.' The point of view varies ; but, what ever the point of view may be, the demand that we should recognize these religions as equals and should not seek to make converts rests upon the idea that the differences are negligible.

Now there is only one point here which the Christian challenges. He acknowledges to the full, as we have already seen, that the great religions are of extreme value as compared with lower faiths, that each contains a great deal of truth, and that each produces precious results : thus far we are all agreed. The Christian simply goes one step beyond the others. He says these differences which so many people regard as negli gible are of large importance.

Things are not as they were fifty years ago. The nations of the world are much nearer each other than they were ;

{31}

immense masses of information about all the peoples and all the religions have been gathered together ; and the Science of Religion has escaped from the period of stumbling experi ment and come into an assured kingdom. Meantime, the Christian Church has been in closer relations with each of the great religions than ever before, has studied their literatures and their practice, and by daily companionship with their educated men has entered into their thought and spiritual experience. In this matter Christians occupy a position of supreme advantage. No other body of men and women have had the priceless opportunities which Mission work among educated Buddhists, Confucianists, Hindus, Jains, Muham- madans, and Zoroastrians has brought them. It is on the basis of these accumulated stores of knowledge and of all this practical religious intercourse with non-Christian nations and individuals that the Christian dares to say that the differences which sever the great religions are by no means negligible, but are of extreme importance. He believes, as a result of his study and his experiences, that the matters in which Christianity differs from the other faiths are of supreme practical value and significance for the life of man. Every thinking man sees clearly the superiority of the great religions over the lowest faiths. The Christian sees as distinctly the superiority of Christianity to the rest of the great religions ; and he believes the evidence can be set forth with overwhelming force.

The savage gets on, one way or another, with his savage religion ; and, as we have seen, it really helps him, does him good. But now, let Muhammadan civilization reach his village. He and his gradually pick up the elements of a higher culture; and, as the years go by, their thoughts are widened. Will his ancient savage faith still suffice ? Will it now be able to do him good, to stimulate him to the best he is capable of? Clearly, it cannot ; for it belongs to the lower stage of knowledge and thought which he has left behind. He must get a higher faith or live an atrophied religious life. This principle holds good universally. A religion is of value

{32}

to a people only so long as it is the very highest the people know. Nor is the reason hard to see. Religion is the creative, organizing, stimulating, kindling power in human life : how can it lead men on, if it is not in advance of them ? When most of the leading ideas of a religion have become incredible to its people, they may continue to observe its ancient practices, but clearly it cannot exercise the old influence over their minds and hearts. The harvest which was reaped from the faith when it was alive will not spring up from it now that it is dead.1

The whole world has entered upon a new stage of existence, the stage of universalism. We are now compelled to think in terms of the human race. Nations whose horizon until recently was bounded by their frontiers now find themselves talking of all the continents. It is not merely that we are interested in world-politics. Moral questions have become interracial and international: the treatment of Indians in South Africa is a case in point. All the civilizations are now clashing ; all the religions have met face to face. The villagers of Bengal, of Shantung, of the Tokaido have been transformed into citizens of the world. Hence the proportions and the relations of things have changed. New ideas forcibly take possession of whole populations, and change the face of things in a day.

These things are of the utmost significance to the Christian. He believes that, in the light of the new circumstances of the nations, the practical differences between Christianity and the other great religions now stand out in startling vividness. The new age, with its world-wide relations and world-wide thought, subjects every business method, every moral rule, and every religious belief to a terrific strain and test. Customs and laws which for centuries have proved equal to the ordinary demands of a people's life are now creaking, crashing, and falling to

[FOOTNOTE] 1 An educated Jain said to a friend of the writer the other day, ' My religion is just a dummy religion.'

{33}

pieces like the spars of an old ship caught in a cyclone. The needs of the new time, so far as we can see, can be met only by Christianity. Not in arrogance, not in partisanship, do we say this, but with wide open eyes and with full consciousness of the stupendous character of the claim we make.

In this volume an attempt is made to substantiate in some degree this tremendous claim in the case of Hinduism. The phenomena of religion are so varied, and require to be stated with so much precision and care, that a single study is much more likely to be useful than a scamper over the whole vast field would be. The rest of this Introduction will state the way in which the relations between Christianity and Hinduism present themselves to the writer, and the method which will be followed in bringing the two religions into comparison in the chapters of the book.

IV. We shall keep in closest touch with facts and also find an excellent starting-point for the development of our position, if we begin with an objection which is frequently urged against Christian Missions in India to-day. Educated Hindus regard the missionary propaganda as an unjustifiable attack on the national genius and spirit. Christianity is objected to not as being untrue, but as being destructive and denationalizing. The following quotation from a Hindu writer puts the charge quite forcibly :

The missionary is the representative of a society, a polity, a social system, a religion and a code of morality which are totally different from our own. He comes as a belligerent and attacks our time- honoured customs and institutions, our sacred literature and traditions, our historical memories and associations. ... He wishes to destroy our society, history, and civilization. . . .

He is the arch-enemy who appears in many guises, the great foe of whatever bears the name of Hindu, the ever-watchful, ever-active, irreconcilable Destroyer of the work of the Rishis and Maha Rishis, of that marvel of moral, intellectual, and civic achievement which is known as Hindu civilization. Let us labour under no delusions on this point. You may forget your own name ; you may forget your mother. But do not for a moment forget the great, all-important fact that the missionary C

{34}

is the most dreadful adversary you have to meet . . . the greatest enemy of dharma and Hindu national life in the present age.1

There is no mistaking the meaning of these sentences. They are clear and to the point. We believe also that the words will create sympathy in every heart. The modern mind makes a deep response to the national spirit.

It is quite true that the destruction to which the writer refers is going on. Serious havoc is being wrought in the ancient structure of Hinduism. It is also true that Christianity is one of the forces that are disintegrating the religion ; but it is only one of several ; and the destruction would go on almost as rapidly as ever, even if every missionary were deported from India to-morrow.

The missionary's power of destruction is subject to a very effective automatic check, and his will to destroy is limited by the very nature of the aim he has in view. Many people imagine that the missionary's addresses are a tissue of exposures and condemnations. Nothing could be farther from the truth. Destruction is of no service to the Christian cause. Total loss of faith does not make a Hindu a Christian. A Christian is made only by personal submission to Christ and spiritual union with Him. Hence Christian addresses must be filled with spiritual wisdom and power if they are to do any good. I have listened to hundreds of addresses delivered to educated Hindus, Muhammadans, and Buddhists by men of different nationalities and churches ; and I believe at least eighty-five per cent, of all the matter has been pure Christian teaching, uttered without reference to any other religion. About ten per cent, of the addresses, I should think, have been comparative studies, dealing with some aspect of Christianity and Hinduism, or some other faith. Even this small number of mixed addresses would not have been given, were it not that non-Christian audiences are very eager to hear such comparisons. Missionaries would have larger

[FOOTNOTE] 1 Prof. Har Dayal. The passage is quoted by Coomaraswamy, Essays in National Idealism, \ 56.

{35}

audiences if they were willing to deal more with the religions, but they prefer to give Christian teaching to smaller numbers. In all the hundreds of meetings I have attended, I have scarcely ever heard a disrespectful sentence used with regard to any non-Christian faith. Even if a missionary were unwise enough to wish to attack Hinduism with hard words, he would not dare to do it ; for no educated audience would stand it. In Mission schools and colleges the teaching is almost purely Christian. One hears only an occasional refer ence to Hinduism.

The case is somewhat different with missionary literature. A much larger proportion of books deal with Hinduism and the other religions. And here the writer readily confesses that the missionary record is not clean. Down to some ten or twelve years ago a considerable number of Christian books published in India contained harsh judgements, denunciatory language, and, here and there, statements that were seriously inaccurate. But that is now almost altogether a thing of the past. The men who write to-day have a far more competent knowledge of the religions they deal with, and the publishing societies will have nothing to do with harsh language and denunciation. But the main point to be noticed is this, that such wrongdoing brings its own penalty and corrective with it. Hindus simply will not read such material, and they mark the man who is guilty and will have nothing to do with him.

Thus the direct destructive power of the missionary is very strictly limited. But Christian teaching by itself introduces new ideas into the Hindu mind ; and, in so far as these are wider, deeper, more ethical, more spiritual than the ideas of Hinduism, they do undoubtedly weaken Hindu faith. But here once more there is the double safeguard : the Hindu need not listen unless he choose to do so ; and the new teach ing can find entrance only if it be very distinctly superior to the old.

The forces that are in the main destructive of Hinduism stand out quite clear. Everything Western brings with it an C 2,

{36}

atmosphere which is most inimical to the old faith. Modern education tells with incalculable force on every student's mind. English literature, modern science, modern inventions, European business methods and the principles of Government action in India, are all disintegrating agents of great efficiency. But there is another force which must not be forgotten : no one delivers such direct or such deadly attacks on Hinduism as the educated Hindu does. The following are extracts from an article by the very writer whose condemnation of the missionary as the arch-enemy of India we have just read : 1

Metaphysics has been the curse of India. It has blighted her history and compassed her ruin. It has converted her great men into miserable quibblers, and led them into useless channels of inquiry and effort. It has been the dangerous will-o'-the-wisp of Indian intellect during many centuries. It has elevated sophistry to the rank of an art, and substituted vain fancies for knowledge. It has condemned India's intellect to run in the same old groove for hundreds of years. It has blinded her seers and led them to mistake phantoms for realities. . . . Arrogant, pretentious, verbose and purblind, it has taken its cackling for an oracle and its fantastic word-towers for solid piles of thought-masonry. . . .

While so much transcendental nonsense is being perpetrated, famines are desolating the land, pestilence and malaria hang like a pall on town and country, and there is not a single decent representative institution, technical institute, laboratory or library in the whole country. Science, economics, and politics are anathema to the enlightened men of India. They love only the eternal verities and the deep secrets of theosophy or brahmavidya ! My friends, while you are going into ecstasy over the intolerable twaddle of many of your Shastras and quoting Schopen hauer and Max Miiller in their praise, the world is stealing a march on you by scientific research, economic reforms, and political progress. While you are explaining to your people the ineffable joys of trance or ' samadhi ', another trance is already upon them — the trance of starva tion and the deadly pest. The Upanishads claim to expound ' that, by knowing which everything is known '. This mediaeval quest for ' the absolute ' is the basis of all the spurious metaphysics of India. The treatises are full of absurd conceits, quaint fancies, and chaotic specula-

[FOOTNOTE] 1 Prof. Har Dayal in the Modern Review, July, 1912. Another article by the same writer containing similar statements with regard to other aspects of the religion appeared in the same magazine in November, 1912.

{37}

tions. And we have not learned that they are worthless. We keep moving in the old rut ; we edit and re-edit the old books instead of translating the classics of European social thought. What would Europe be if Frederic Harrison, Brieux, Bebel, Anatole France, Herve, Haeckel, Giddings, and Marshall should employ their time in composing treatises on Duns Scotus and Thomas Aquinas, and discussing the merits of the laws of the Pentateuch and the poetry of Beowulf ? Indian pundits and graduates seem to suffer from a kind of mania for what is effete and antiquated. Thus an institution, established by progressive men, aims at leading our youths through Sanskrit grammar to the Vedas via the Six Darshanas ! What a false move in the quest for wisdom ! It is as if a caravan should travel across the desert to the shores of the Dead Sea in search of fresh water ! Young men of India, look not for wisdom in the musty parchments of your metaphysical treatises. There is nothing but an endless round of verbal jugglery there. Read Rousseau and Voltaire, Plato and Aristotle, Haeckel and Spencer, Marx and Tolstoi, Ruskin and Comte, and other European thinkers, if you wish to understand life and its problems. . . .

India has hundreds of really sincere and aspiring young men and women, who are free from all taint of greed and worldliness, but they are altogether useless for any purpose that one may appreciate. They have established monasteries in remote nooks in the mountains in order to realize the Brahman. Instead of bearing the heat and burden of the day along with their fellow men, they aim at reaching a superior stage of illumination by practising all sorts of mysterious postures and other funny devices of a crude mysticism. . . .

' Samadhi ' or trance is regarded as the acme of spiritual progress ! How strange it is that a capacity for swooning away should be con sidered the mark of wisdom ! It is very easy to lose consciousness if one has strong emotions and a feeble intellect. That is why ladies faint so often on the slightest provocation. But in India samadhi is the eighth stage of yoga, which only ' paramahansas ' can reach. These be thy gods, O Israel ! To look upon an abnormal psychological con dition produced by artificial means as the sign of enlightenment was a folly reserved for Indian philosophers.

This type of writing is by no means uncommon to-day in Indian journalism. The* following appeared as a leading article in the columns of the Bengalee^ the leading Hindu paper in Calcutta, the editor of which is Mr. Surendranath Bannerjea, the noted nationalist :

[FOOTNOTE] 1 Reproduced in the Statesman of September 28, 1911.

{38}

We have referred in our previous issues to the fact that Hindu India is at present divided into camps— the camp of the orthodox who hold that salvation lies in every Hindu conforming rigidly and scrupulously to the rules and observances of social life handed down from the past, and that of the unorthodox, men who under the inspiration of Western culture and Western ideals have been dreaming of building up a new India by transplanting into their country the spirit of the social, industrial, and political institutions of Europe. It requires little reason ing to convince oneself that the extreme conservatism of the orthodox section of the Hindu community which finds itself fulfilled in an unswerving adherence to existing institutions and looks upon the least modification of, or innovation upon, them as a profanity and a desecra tion, is necessarily the negation of progress. It is born of the conviction that every practice and every custom at present current in Hindu society has had a divine origin, and that it is consequently no less a sacrilege to depart therefrom than it would be to deny the inspiration of the Vedas.

But it is clear that the community committed to such a creed is doomed to stagnate, and must eventually go under in the modern struggle for existence into which all the nations of the world have been forced by the annihilation of time and space through steam and electricity. Not a people in the world but is revising and readjusting its institutions, its traditional ideas and ideals to the new conditions, to the stern circumstance that the nation that aspires to occupy a place on the stage of progress has now for its competitors not only its neighbours but all the peoples of the world. What chance has India to keep abreast, or even to be within a measurable distance, of the sister nations in progressive advancement, with her sworn allegiance to a pattern of society which was suited to the conditions of a thousand years ago ?

Let us take a few instances. We have worshipped the Goddess of ' Sakti ' (i.e. energy) for centuries ; how is it that through those very centuries we have remained so weak and helpless as a nation ? We are the devout worshippers of ' Sarasvat! ' (the goddess of learning) ; and at the same time have received a scant share of her blessings. The priests who are the monopolists of the religious rites and ministrations are for the most part as innocent of Vedic knowledge at the present day as the ' Sudra ' was in the days when the gates of knowledge were shut against him by the iron rules of castes. We offer our devotions to ' Lakshmi ' (the goddess of wealth) every recurrent year ; and we remain none the less a nation of paupers.

The orthodox Hindu makes a fetish of certain rules of hygiene formulated by his ancestors in the dim past; he regards it as sin, for

{39}

instance, to take his meals without bathing, or to remain in unwashed clothes for more than a day ; but, with all his religious devotion to the traditional rules of cleanliness, he betrays a strange indifference to the principles of sanitation evolved by modern science, though plague and cholera and all the other diseases that are generated in filth are decimating thousands of his fellow men year after year. One has only to be in a Hindu's house for a day to discover his ignorance of elementary sanitary principles in contrast with his particular conformity to the few rules of sanitation enjoined upon him by tradition, One would go grievously wrong in persuading oneself that the Hindu is apathetic to the rules of sanitation and the other life-saving injunctions of modern science, because he had transcended, by virtue of a strenuous spiritual discipline, the human craving for life. He loves life no less dearly than the passionate worldlings of the material West, as he calls Europeans.

The Hindu father blesses his son's wife with the invocation ' May she be like Sabitri '. But was there room in ancient Hindu life for the Philistinism which actuates the modern Hindu father to huckster and chaffer over the price of his son with the unfortunate person in search of a bridegroom for his daughter? It is evident even to the casual observer that extreme orthodoxy is without a soul to save it from the destructive influences that impend over it from all sides.

The orthodox Hindu clings, in the name of religion and morality, to dead forms and mummied institutions from which the informing spirit has long departed. Is not the practice of worshipping God at prescribed intervals of the day and the year, in a language which the worshipper in many cases does not understand, as mechanical as the automatic working of a machine ? Is there the least trace of life in a system of rites which demands the punctilious performing of a number of cere monials on the sole ground that these have been performed through the preceding centuries ? Ask the Hindu why he wastes his substance and gets into debt over the celebration of his daughter's marriage ; his honest answer will always be ' because his forefathers have done so '. Inquire of the bridegroom what he has understood of the sacrament he has gone through, what he has understood of the Mantras (Vedic texts) he has uttered at the dictation often of an ignorant and mispro nouncing priest ; he will tell you he has not understood much or perhaps anything at all. But to his mind that is of no moment, for has he not fulfilled his duty by conforming to the directions laid down in the Shastras (Hindu laws) ? But surely, in the days when Hinduism was living, the Hindu who said his prayers to his God did so in full consciousness of what he was saying ; the young bridegroom uttered the sacred Mantras in full cognizance of their purpose and purport.

{40}

We will not multiply instances. But this much is clear, that when a people's religion and rites have sunk into soulless formulae they can exercise no corrective or controlling influence over, they must cease to be in intimate relationship with its daily thought and life. And so it is in our country. The champion of orthodoxy, conforming as he does to the fossilized forms of a religious and moral code which have long ceased to embody the living spirit, is most un-Hindu in the family affairs of his life.

We may also quote a few paragraphs from an article which appeared in the Madras Christian College Magazine in April, 1912, from the pen of a Hindu, Mr. V. Kunhikannan :

Probably few nations in the world, ancient or modern, have been more superstitious, more credulous, more gullible than the Hindus. It is a most significant and noteworthy fact that even at this distance of time, even in this budding twentieth century, in an age of triumphant intellectual and scientific advance unparalleled in the history of the human race, many things which have been burnt to ashes under the all-embracing fire of modern science and modern thought, are still piously retained by the vast majority of the Hindus.

Whosoever has eyes to see and uses them cannot deny that a marvellous religious revival has actually set in among the Hindus within the last few years. . . .

But, however pleasant it may be to contemplate this aspect of the revival, no one can shut his eyes to the all too visible recrudescence of ancient superstitions which has accompanied the more truly religious revival. It is most deplorable that, with the luxuriant growth of the corn, much weed has also sprung up to hinder the ripening of the true grain.

It is very painful, but nevertheless true, that the Theosophical Society is largely, if not mainly, responsible for this state of affairs at the present time. It is not a little amusing to find learned Theosophists defending and popularizing even the worst superstitions of the Hindus and trying to find an occult meaning for every tradition, rite, and ceremony which we have outgrown by the evolution of the intellect and the increasing knowledge of Nature and her laws. No doubt Theosophy has contributed not a little to the present religious revival of the Hindus. But if it has done much that is good and noble, it has also done harm through attempting in these modern days to make us believe that all the stories of the Puranas are historical facts ; that behind every physical phenomenon a God is at work ; that idolatry and the worship of the many gods is right ; that when a man dies the bodies of his nearest

{41}

relations are literally polluted ; that there is an occult use and purpose in the meaningless ritual and ceremonies of the Hindus, and so on. It is absolutely useless and futile to teach such things in this age in which reason and intellect predominate. . . . Every critical observer sees that modern thought has almost completely undermined the peculiar Hindu ideas and customs. The framework of that mighty system of religious and social organization has well-nigh broken down, and it needs no prophet to say that at no distant date a complete re arrangement of things will be the result. . . .

It is quite surprising to find even to-day Hindus who abhor the idea of foreign travel on the strength of the supposed injunctions of the Shastras against it. The practice of excommunicating transgressors of this rule is still prevalent among the higher castes. Upon a superstition so glaring comment is needless.

Again, I have often noted with pitying interest how even educated Hindus stand up in reverential awe and bow down with clasped hands before the lamp lighted at dusk and shown upon the verandah in every Hindu home. They are bowing to the fire-god, it appears ! It is intel ligible that in times of primitive ignorance men should have personified the forces of nature and worshipped them as gods, being wonderstruck at the mysteries of Nature. They saw the glorious sun and thought it was a god and began to worship the same. But what is to be thought of the modern Hindu who follows suit, in spite of the advancement of knowledge of Nature and her secrets ?

Again, it is a sorry spectacle to witness Hindus still worshipping the village gods and goddesses in the most hideous and superstitious manner. In my own place there is a ' kavu ' (temple) where thousands of fowls and sheep are every year butchered for the propitiation of the supposed god and goddess. The sacred temple is literally transformed into a slaughter-house. Can any man conceive a more horrible and degrading way of worshipping the Supreme Father of the universe ?

Another superstition is the belief that our sins will be washed away by bathing in the water of the Ganges and other sacred rivers and by visiting sacred (?) cities like Benares. For this purpose millions of Hindus spend all their hard-earned money in visiting such places and bathing in the waters of such rivers, thinking that thus their sins will be forgiven. Could any idea be more primitive ? If we can commit sins and wash them away by bathing in the waters of certain rivers, how easy have things become ! Such ideas are most dangerous to man's moral evolution. They encourage the commission of sin by holding out the hope of cleansing through the holy water of the Ganges.

Once more, Hindus waste a lot of money by performing the she- shakriyas (after-death ceremonies of the dead, such as the pinnam,

{42}

shraddha, &c.). We have absolutely no evidence to show that the dead derive any benefit at all from such ceremonies, and, if the doctrine of karma be true, it is clear that a man's suffering after death will be exactly according to the evil deeds done by himself in his mundane existence, and he will have to pay the debt to the last farthing. How then can shraddha afford him any benefit ? It is as yet unexplained how certain rites performed here in the physical world can affect those who are supposed to be in some other spheres which are anything but physical. Unless and until a clear explanation is forthcoming, no rational man has any right to perform acts the use of which is entirely unknown to him.

Another startling superstition is that small-pox and cholera are due to the visitation of certain goddesses. The goddess is angry, for some reason or other, and hence the outbreak of the epidemic. Although Western science has opened our eyes to the real cause and prevention of these fell diseases, yet the vast majority of Hindus piously retain the old belief to their eternal shame and degradation. Again, if any disease occurs in a house an astrologer is consulted before the physician is called in.

Every one will realize what a potent destructive influence such writing as this by Hindus must exercise on the young Hindu mind. What missionary would ever dare, or wish, to write in such a strain ?

Perhaps most readers will now agree that, whether mission aries are to be condemned as the arch-enemies of India or not, a far more important matter has come in sight, namely this that, whoever may be to blame, Hinduism is being disintegrated. This is the great fact which has to be realized. The ancient religion of India is breaking up. The following chapters will give abundant proof of this fact. Each of its great old religious ideas is fading out of the minds -of her educated men. They are steadily decaying, and there arc but few signs of fresh integration.

It is also clear that the cause of the break-up of the old faith is the coming of the new era. The thought of the West creates a new climate which is fatal to Hinduism. The air is too rarified. Its fundamental principles shrivel up in the new atmosphere. Those who have entered the world of Western

{43}

culture simply cannot hold them. Many proofs of this will appear as we proceed. The third article quoted above states the fact very clearly in two sentences : l

Every critical observer sees that modern thought has almost com pletely undermined the peculiar Hindu ideas and customs. The framework of that mighty system of religious and social organization has well-nigh broken down.

Thus Christianity, so far from being an intruder at this time, is most seriously required to sow the seeds of spiritual religion and healthy moral life. Thoughtful Indian leaders frankly recognize that the ethical and religious influence of missions is of extreme value in this time of trial ; and every one who has been in close touch with the educated classes realizes that they need moral help most seriously. But we may go farther. If ' the framework of that mighty system of religious and social organization has well-nigh broken down ', is it not high time to bring to the mind and heart of India a new system, fit to stand the strain and stress of the age, and equal to the task of stimulating the Hindu people to the noblest spiritual activity ? This supreme need will steadily become more apparent as the decay of Hinduism proceeds.

It will now be well worth our while to return to the charge, that Christianity is a destroying and denationalizing force, and try to see what is behind it.

A. The first point to be realized is that this is an indict ment which has been laid against the religion at many points in its history from the very beginning. At a meeting of the Jewish Council, the case of Christ was discussed, and the talk was,

What do we? for this man doeth many signs. If we let him thus alone, all men will believe on him : and the Romans will come and take away both our place and our nation.2

[FOOTNOTE] 1 See p. 41. 2 John 11, 47, 48.

{44}

But the high priest said,

Ye know nothing at all, nor do ye take account that it is expedient for you that one man should die for the people, and that the whole nation perish not.1

In consequence they handed Him over to the Romans and had Him crucified. When Paul and Silas preached in the Roman colony of Philippi in Macedonia, they were brought before the city magistrates, and what their accusers said was,

These men, being Jews, do exceedingly trouble our city, and set forth customs which it is not lawful for us to receive or to observe, being Romans.2

The authorities of the Roman Empire considered the religion so inimical to the customs and laws that regulated civilized society that they made the very profession of Christianity a crime ; in the eye of the Roman law Christians stood on a level with robbers ; and from time to time during the first three centuries fierce persecutions broke out in which count less thousands of men and women suffered death for their faith.

History has repeated itself in modern times. In the six teenth century Christianity was introduced into Japan, and a considerable section of the people became Christian ; but in the seventeenth century the Government became afraid that the movement might prove disloyal, and in consequence they forbade the profession of the religion, and stamped it out in such a fierce persecution as has seldom been witnessed.3 It was a similar idea that led to twenty-six years of persecu tion in Madagascar. Finally, the Boxer rising in China, only thirteen years ago, in which thousands of Chinese Christians laid down their lives for Christ, sprang from the idea that it was a foreign and denationalizing faith.

It is thus clear that there is some feature of the religion which inevitably excites suspicion in this way. It is not

[FOOTNOTE] 1 John 11, 49, 50. 2 Acts 16, 20, 21.

[FOOTNOTE] 3 See below, p. 291.

{45}

at all strange that Hindus should think and speak as they do.

B. But let us look at the subsequent history.

1. Is there any thinking man to-day who believes the Jews acted wisely in getting Christ crucified ? No ; all men now acknowledge that the teaching and the life of Jesus were the healthiest and holiest influences of the time ; and that, so far from being a danger to nationality, He was the only wise friend the nation had. If the Jews had accepted Him, they would have retained the nationality which within forty years they flung away in war with Rome. So far from destroying the Jewish religion, Jesus has made the God of Abraham, the Scriptures of Israel, and the history of Israel the heritage of the whole human family.

2. Turn to the Roman Empire. What has the course of history shown ? It is now plain that in the early Christian centuries the ancient religions were dying, inevitably passing away. The Roman emperors, conscious of the danger, sought to prop them and revive them ; and they believed that in Caesar-worship a new living centre had been found for the old faiths ; but it was all in vain. Christianity, so far from being a dangerous foe, was precisely the friend the great Empire needed. Constantine realized the truth and acted on it. Not only the safety of the old Empire, but the life and health of Europe, nay the promise and possibility of the whole modern world, were aboard that frail bark which the emperors sought so industriously to wreck.

3. It is also most significant that it is in Europe and America, where civilization has felt the influence of Christ most deeply, that the modern self-governing peoples have appeared. Autonomous nationality, the ideal towards which the Muhammadan powers and the ancient peoples of Asia are now straining, is the product of a Christian atmosphere.

4. Commodore Perry appeared in Yedo Bay in 1853 ; in 1854 the Japanese Government signed the treaty which opened Japan to the world; and in 1858 missionaries entered

{46}

the country. But the profession of Christianity was still interdicted. In 1868 a fresh edict was placed on the public edict-boards, which ran :

The evil sect called Christian is strictly prohibited. Suspicious persons should be reported to the proper officers, and rewards will be given.1

The representatives of the foreign powers protested against the edict, but the Government persisted until 1872, when the edicts were removed, Christians in prison were released, and those in exile were allowed to return home. Thus it is only forty-one years since Japan gave up the persecution of Christians.

Yet on February 25, 1912, the Japanese Government held a Conference in Tokyo with the express purpose of strengthening the moral forces at work in the country ; and to that Conference not only Buddhists and Shintoists, but Christians were invited. There were present, by Government invitation, thirteen Shintoists, fifty-one Buddhists, and seven Christians.2

Clearly the Japanese Government had learnt a lesson in the course of these forty years.

5. The Boxer rising, in which many missionaries and many thousands of Christians were murdered as enemies of the national life, took place in 1900. Yet Sun Yat Sen, the leader of the Revolution which made China a Republic, is a Christian ; many of the most prominent nationalist leaders are Christians ; Yuan Shi Kai, the President of the Republic, is a personal friend of missionaries, and had a missionary's daughter to educate his children ; and on the i;th of April last the Chinese Government requested that prayer should be offered for China in all Christian churches throughout the Empire.

6. Even in India to-day we believe the real character of the religion is steadily become clearer. It is quite true that

[FOOTNOTE] 1 Murray's Japan (Story of the Nations Series), 379.

[FOOTNOTE] 2 J.R.M., July, 1912, 552.

{47}

the infinitesimal Christian communities, mere pin-heads amid the vast masses of the Hindu and Muhammadan population, have, in the past, felt it necessary to keep very much to them selves, in order to preserve in purity the precious truth committed to them ; but the iron necessity of that hour is now passing away ; and Christian men and women will hence forward take a rapidly increasing share in the national life.

Even now the signs are clearly visible to every one who has eyes. Is Christian work among the Outcastes de nationalizing? Let the Brahma, the Arya, and the Hindu answer, who imitate the missionary to the limit of their power. Are Christians denationalized when they sit on the bench as Magistrates, or serve as members of District Boards or Municipalities? How would women's hospitals in India be staffed apart from Indian Christian girls ? How many Hindu schools for girls employ Christian women as teachers ? Do educated Hindus become denationalized when they become Christians ? Was there a truer Nationalist in India, from Kashmir to Cape Comorin, than Kali Charan Banurji ? He was a prominent member of the Indian National Congress from its inception to his death ; he was elected by the graduates to represent Calcutta University on the Council of the Lieutenant-Governor of Bengal ; and he was a personal friend of every prominent Indian of whatever creed.1 Or is Christian education denationalizing? We venture to think that the following vignette from the pen of a Hindu 2 will become classical :

Though cut off from the parent community by religion and by prejudice and intolerance, the Indian Christian woman has been the evangelist of education to hundreds and thousands of Hindu homes. Simple, neat, and kindly, she has won her way to the recesses of orthodoxy, overcoming a strength and bitterness of prejudice of which few outsiders can have an adequate conception. As these sentences are

[FOOTNOTE] 1 See his life by B. R. Barber, published by the C. L. S. I.

[FOOTNOTE] 2 From /. S. R. The passage was quoted in the Christian Patriot of March 28, 1903.

{48}

being written, there rises before the mind's eye the picture of scores of tidy, gentle girls, trudging hot and dusty streets barefooted, under a scorching sun, to carry the light of knowledge to homes where they will not be admitted beyond the ante-chamber, and where they cannot get a glass of water without humiliation, yet never complaining, ever patient. To these brave and devoted women wherever they are, friends of female education all over the country will heartily wish ' God-speed '.

It thus seems to be clear that the suspicion that Christianity is a destructive and denationalizing force, despite its strength and persistence, is, at least, in large measure, a mistake.

C. Can we then specify what clement in Christianity it is that leads men in every land to think that it is destructive and denationalizing ?

Jesus comes to each individual, saying,

Follow me. He then explains what is implied in this invitation :

If any one wish to come after me, let him renounce himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.1

This most serious act, in which a man renounces himself and accepts Christ as the Lord of his life, necessarily involves the giving up of the worldly life, and also the renunciation of any other religion he may have been living by. If he is a follower of one of the great old national faiths, this demand usually seems to him a most unreasonable thing. A national religion has a mass of national ideas, customs, and forms of life associated with it. Religion and patriotism are in it intertwined. In most of the ancient nations, the man who did not recognize the national gods was regarded as a bad citizen. That was one of the counts in the indictment against Socrates. Thus to men trained in such a faith Christ inevitably appears to be an enemy not only of the national religion but also of the national life.

Christianity thus seems bad enough in its relation to the

[FOOTNOTE] 1 Mark 8, 34.

{49}

individual at the very outset. But things assume a far worse aspect when a number of men leave the national religion and become Christians. It then seems that the very existence of the national religion is threatened. Christianity is a new, unheard-of sort of monster in which nationality seems to be swallowed up. Another portent usually appears at the same time. As Christian thought and teaching spread, many of the doctrines and practices of the old faith begin to look unreal and paltry. Hence the popular cry arises, ' Let us get rid of this intruder. We do not need it. We did very well without it.'

The Christian idea, that the individual should renounce his old national religion, is not an excrescence, but belongs to the very heart of Christ's system. The truth He teaches is for all men ; and we cannot get the benefit of it except by complete submission to Him and faithful obedience to His laws. That His call, ' Follow me,' should lead to the surrender of the old religion on the part of the individual, and in the end to the death of the old religion, is in full accordance with the leading principles of His teaching.

Christ demands a serious change from every one who seeks to follow Him : ' Repent of your sins ; lay aside your old life ; deny yourself; surrender yourself to Me ; and die to all your old passions and desires.' It is only through death that Christ promises life to us. The great statement,

If any man wish to come after me, let him renounce, himself, and take up his cross, and follow me,1

is immediately followed by the explanatory sentence,

For whosoever would save his life shall lose it ; and whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and the gospel's shall save it.2

This is Christ's constant attitude to the individual : eternal life springs up through the death of the old self.

The same principle applies to each of the national religions as well. Each is prevented by its national character and

1 Mark 8, 34. 2 Mark 8, 35.

D

{50}

organization from working out its own noblest thoughts prac tically and making them available for other nations. Each must therefore die before it can bear fruit in all the world and find its highest aspirations truly fulfilled. Just before the death of Christ a group of Greeks came to speak to Him in Jerusalem. It is a matter of the utmost interest and significance that, when the representatives of Greek religion, philosophy, and art stood before Him, it was this great lesson of life through death that He sought to teach them. His words were :

The hour is come, that the Son of man should be glorified. Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except a grain of wheat fall into the earth and die, it abideth by itself alone ; but if it die, it beareth much fruit. He that loveth his life loseth it ; and he that hateth his life in this world shall keep it unto life eternal.1

This law, which was about to be fulfilled in Himself, He pressed home upon the Greeks as necessary for them also ; nor need we doubt that He saw clearly that the system under which the Greek people were living would have to die before it could become of the highest service to the whole world.

This principle received its highest illustration in Christ Himself. He gained His victory through death. His own resurrection and the birth of the Christian Church were both fruits of His death on the cross. It was Calvary that created Christianity. The living principle of the faith was expressed once for all in the self-devotion and death of our Lord. Like the grain of wheat He fell into the earth and died, in order to bear much fruit.

Thus, when Jesus says, ' Follow me,' He means to say ' Follow me in the surrender of everything ; follow me, if need be, even to the cross '. This dying to all that impedes the work of God in the soul includes for the Hindu a dying to Hinduism, which is no easy or pleasant duty.

In the philosophy and theistic theology of Hinduism there

[FOOTNOTE] 1 John 12, 23-25.

{51}

are many precious truths enshrined ; but, as we shall see, the ancient Hindu system, within which they appeared, effectually prevents them from leavening the people. This hard, unyield ing system must fall into the ground and die, before the aspirations and the dreams of Hindu thinkers and ascetics can be set free to grow in health and strength so as to bear fruit in the lives of Hindu villagers. Hinduism must die in order to live. It must die into Christianity.

D. How then does death issue in life ?

By His life, death, and teaching Jesus founded a new religion. He thus takes His place, in one sense, beside other founders of religions. Yet the way in which He did it separates Him from all others. We shall understand best if we com pare Him with the great Buddhist leader. Gautama cut himself adrift completely from Hinduism and denounced the Vedic sacrifices, the Vedas, and all the works of the Brahmans. He made a clean sweep and a new beginning. Jesus, on the other hand, acknowledged that the faith of Israel was from God, yet declared that He had been sent to transform it into a new religion. This was possible, because He knew that God's method of revelation is not the presentation, once for all, of a complete system of truth expressed in a book from all eternity, but a gradual and historical process. The simple beginnings of the faith of Israel are laid before us in the Book of Genesis ; they grow before our eyes in the narratives of the other books of Moses ; and they find still richer development in the Prophets and the Psalms. But even in them God's will is not completely revealed. Hence, to Jesus, the religion of Israel was given by God, but not given in permanency. It was God's instrument for the training of Israel. He came to crown it by transforming it into the religion for all men, and to crown its knowledge of God by revealing Him as the Father of men.

The contrast between Christ and Buddha in this relation comes out most clearly when we compare the Buddhist books with the Bible. There is no hymn from the Rigveda, no D 2

{52}

meditation from the Aranyakas, no glowing passage from the Upanishads in the Pali Tripitaka ; while the whole of the Jewish Scriptures reappear in the Bible as the Old Testament. Thus the principle of living growth, of progress and develop ment, is set before us in visible form in the Christian Scrip tures. The Old Testament is the bud ; the New Testament is the flower.

But, though the whole of the Jewish Scriptures are contained in the Christian Bible, they are not used by the Christian as they were used by the Jew. The whole of the Old Testament is retained, but it is read through Christ. For the Jew the whole is binding ; for the Christian it is binding only in so far as it is in consonance with the Spirit of Christ. The Christian does not obey the Laws of Moses, though these are all contained in his sacred book. He does not offer animal sacrifice, nor abstain from the unclean foods of the law, nor circumcise his male children. The institutions of the old law were necessary for the childhood of the world. They are pictures, symbols, prophecies, but the reality is Christ. To the man who knows Christ these external rites are unnecessary. Yet the whole of the Old Testament is of very great value for the religious life ; and a very large part of it is filled with the highest moral and spiritual truth, and is accepted as such by the Christian, as it was accepted by Christ.

Christ regarded the Old Testament as pointing forward to Himself. Here is a most instructive scene, His first sermon in the synagogue of His own city Nazareth :

And he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up : and he entered, as his custom was, into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and stood up to read. And there was delivered unto him the book of the prophet Isaiah. And he opened the book, and found the place where it was written :

The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,

Because he anointed me to preach good tidings to the poor :

He hath sent me to proclaim release to the captives,

{53}

And recovering of sight to the blind,

To set at liberty them that are bruised,

To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord.

And he closed the book, and gave it back to the attendant, and sat down : and the eyes of all in the synagogue were fastened on him. And he began to say unto them, To-day hath this scripture been fulfilled in your ears.1

In His coming, teaching, life, death, resurrection, person, the whole of the old religion is summed up, and makes a new beginning, no longer merely for Israel, but for the world. He is the Messiah of the prophets ; He brings in the Kingdom of Heaven promised by them ; and His teaching sums up the Law and the Prophets. In Him all the old lines meet, and again stretch out to all the world. He sums up His whole relationship to Israel in the words : I am come not to destroy, but to fulfil.2

The religions of Greece and Rome could not be the starting- point for the religion of the world, like the religion of Israel. Yet in them also much broken spiritual light was visible ; and every type, symbol, and shadow found itself reproduced in spiritual reality in Christ. He did not destroy the old civilization, philosophy, literature, and art. Everything of value that the old world contained has been preserved and has flowered once more in Christianity. Our modern educa tion, thought, science, and art rest on the ancient foundations. It is most significant that Greek philosophers at first regarded the crucified Jew with unspeakable disdain, but later realized that Greek philosophy was but a preparation for his teaching. Clement of Alexandria writes :

Philosophy tutored the Greeks for Christ as the Law did the Hebrews.3

Thus it will be with India. Missionaries do not 'wish to destroy' Hindu 'society, history, and civilization', as Prof. Har Dayal imagines they do.4 The Muslim came, smash-

[FOOTNOTE] 1 Luke 4, 16-21. 2 Matt. 5, 17.

[FOOTNOTE] 3 StromateiSi i. 28. 4 See p. 33, above.

{54}

ing temple and image, killing priest and scholar, confiscating temple and monastic lands. Christ comes, not to steal, and kill, and destroy, but to give life and to give it abundantly.1 Under the spell of His influence modern India has already awaked to new and wondrous life. Here is the testimony of one who is not a Christian, Sir Narayan Chandavarkar, Vice- Chancellor of the University of Bombay and a Justice of the Bombay High Court :

The ideas that lie at the heart of the Gospel of Christ are slowly but surely permeating every part of Hindu society and modifying every phase of Hindu thought.2

Christ is already breathing life into the Hindu people. He does not come to destroy. To Him all that is great and good is dear, the noble art of India, the power and spirituality of its best literature, the beauty and simplicity of Hindu village life, the love and tenderness of the Hindu home, the devotion and endurance of the ascetic schools. Paul gave perfect expression to the Christian spirit in this regard :

Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honourable, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report ; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things.3

True, Christ passes everything through His refiner's fire, in order that the dross, which Hindus know so well, may pass away ; but the gold will then shine all the brighter. What He cannot endure is that fine art and high literature and lofty philosophy should be used to enslave the poor of the people to superstition. All must be purged for their sakes. Hindus, like His own people, imagine Him a destroyer; but, when the period of pain and strife has passed, they too will see that He is not the Destroyer but the Restorer of the national heritage, and that all the gleams of light that make Hindu faith and

[FOOTNOTE] 1 John 10, 10.

[FOOTNOTE] 2 From an address delivered in the Y. M. C. A., Bombay, on June 14 1910.

[FOOTNOTE] 3 Phil. 4, 8.

{55}

worship so fascinating to the student find in Him their explanation and consummation. It is one of the chief aims of this volume to show that Christianity is the Crown of Hinduism.

E. The Churches of the West and the missionaries they send must obey this spiritual law of seeking life through death.

i. In relation to those they seek to win to Christ. The missionary's life must be a daily death to self in every aspect of his behaviour, if he is to exercise his full influence for Christ. No words are sufficient to tell how meek and lowly in heart the winner of souls must be, what humility of speech, what quietness of manner, what superlative self-effacement are necessary, in order that the light of Christ may shine through him into Hindu eyes. The peculiar circumstances of India give three aspects of this duty special prominence.

There is, first, race feeling. The fact that India is under Britain complicates matters for the Christian rather seriously. The missionary is presumably quite incapable of the extreme insolence not infrequently shown to Indians by individual Europeans, when the swaggering British private, the shop assistant, the mill mechanic, the army officer, and, occasion ally, even the Indian civilian, display their common lack of breeding and of the imperial instinct. Yet there is extreme danger even for the missionary. He comes to the Indian because he believes him to be his brother ; but the glories of his race and of its imperial position still live in his thought ; and the simple fact that, for the present, a much larger per centage of effective men are found among Europeans than among Indians, is apt to assume exaggerated importance when one comes to practical work ; so that the brotherhood which Christ teaches us tends to become qualified by other considerations. The danger is that these ideas will colour his behaviour, and that the Indian will be only too conscious that he is regarded as an inferior creature. We must there fore be most careful to treat every man with the supreme courtesy which Christ would show him, lest we cause one of

{56}

these little ones to stumble. It is also right and wise to seek the closest social relations possible. Christ's example is here decisive. The extreme difficulties which Indian society presents should only stir the Christian to greater wisdom and inventiveness. In this as in other things love can see ways at first invisible. The missionary must also check the tendency, so noticeable in certain Indians, to become sub servient to the European. Our noble King-Emperor has shown the right spirit: a Punjabi was about to prostrate himself at his feet, but the king caught him ere he fell. The Christian must refuse to allow the Oriental to do otherwise than play the man.

The sensitive Indian spirit is often repelled by our too self- conscious culture, by our society manner or university tone. For culture itself the Indian has unlimited respect ; but the man who makes a shibboleth of the trifles of behaviour and the lady with a society sniff grate on his very soul, and make him shrink into his innermost reserve. There is surely no excuse for the man who follows Christ and studies St. Paul if he fail in this matter.

The rule for the behaviour of the monk, Buddhist as well as Hindu, which is dealt with below,1 has given the Hindu a high ideal of how the religious teacher should live and act towards others. He readily grasps the point that Christ does not bid His followers live as monks ; yet he expects them to show the meek, patient, unworldly temper demanded of the monk — no anger, no fuss, no overbearing words. Our Western temper, eager to act. impatient of laziness, crookedness, scamped work, and fecklessness, is apt to rise in indignation in practical relations with Indians. The Hindu may not behave better himself, but he holds that the missionary has not behaved rightly ; and Christ agrees with him.

2. The same law must rule our conduct in relation to Hinduism. There is so much that is immoral and cruel in the laws and practices of the religion that the first impulse 1 p. 256 f.

{57}

of the healthy Christian is to denounce these things in the frankest possible terms, as they are denounced by Hindus in the articles quoted above;1 and it must be confessed that, at first sight, it seems as if such denunciation were fully justified from the practical standpoint of the welfare of the people of India. But there is a further fact which the practical missionary usually fails altogether to notice. No matter how gross, superstitious, cruel, or immoral a law or practice may be, there is always a glint of higher light upon it. This is shown at length in our last chapter. Even if it be a jewel in a swine's snout, it is there, and it is the secret of the reverence in which the rite or custom is held by the Hindu. Hence it is neither just nor wise to denounce the practice without reference to that which touches the sensitive Hindu spirit. Indeed the full scientific truth is not told unless both elements are recognized and the way in which the spiritual gleam comes to fall on the vicious act is set forth. Thus in dealing with every detail of Hinduism the utmost self-restraint is required. There must be a dying to self in this matter also. The writer here wishes to make public confession that during the first years of his life in India unguarded expressions fell from him in teaching, in public addresses, and in literature, of which he is now heartily ashamed.

Many a Hindu who is in the main friendly towards the practical work of missions and also towards the spread of the teaching of Christ in India complains that missionary literature very frequently judges Hinduism by the worst parts of Hindu practice, and sets forth, in contrast, the highest ideals of Christianity. It must be confessed that there is some truth in this serious charge ; and the writer of this volume wishes to disassociate himself altogether from such writing. Christian criticism is unchristian unless it be impregnably just and truly Christlike in tone. Unsleeping watchfulness requires to be exercised in this regard. Strenuous efforts have been made

[FOOTNOTE] 1 See pp. 36-42.

{58}

in the following chapters to be scrupulously fair, and to interpret Hindu teaching with as much imaginative sympathy as a Christian would wish a Hindu to bestow on the religion of Christ. Special care has been taken not to violate the great canon, that a religion must not be judged by the conduct of those who refuse to obey it. The crimes and immoralities of a country can be attributed to its religion only in so far as it commands or condones them. As the sexual vice of Europe exists in defiance of Christ, so, much that is deplorable in Hindu life arises in flat disobedience to the precepts of Hinduism. Hence the only sane rule is to judge a religion by its principles, its laws, and its institutions, and not by the excesses of certain groups of the population.

3. There must be the same readiness to die to self in rela tion to certain aspects of our own Christianity. When we say that Christianity is the Crown of Hinduism, we do not mean Christianity as it is lived in any nation, nor Christianity as it is defined and elaborated in detail in the creed, preaching, ritual, liturgy, and discipline of any single church, but Christianity as it springs living and creative from Christ Him self. Christ is the head of the whole Church, not of any one denomination. Christ is human, not Western. Far less is He English, Scottish, American, or German.

Only in this way can we be true to Christ. For He set forth no detailed laws for the Church, for the moral life, or for the State. While Hinduism, Muhammadanism, and other religions have laid down detailed rules for human conduct in the matter of the family and other institutions, Christ deliberately refused to do so. In all these things He taught merely the spiritual principles which are necessary for our human life and left us to apply them in detail ourselves. The contrast between the Old and New Testaments in this regard is so striking as to leave no room for doubt. The Law of Moses differs very seriously in many ways from the Law of Manu ; yet both bring every aspect of human life under religious law ; both mix up religious, political, moral, and

{59}

sanitary regulations in a way that is most disconcerting to a modern mind ; and both contain numerous rules for man's guidance in social matters. Thus, in their general form, the Hindu Law and the Jewish Law stand on a par. But there is no law in the New Testament. Jesus left no detailed social and religious regulations for His followers. Instead of a multi tude of commands and prohibitions, He left them His own principles and the divine freedom of sons of God. In this way He gained two most valuable ends.

First of all, His system is truly universal, applicable to all races of men, to all countries, and to all times ; while every detailed system of laws, however wisely drawn up, necessarily becomes obsolete as civilization advances. Hindus are now beginning to discover that this is true with regard to all the social institutions of their religion, and they are casting about for wise means of reform. It is the same thing that is wrong with Muslim institutions ; but very few Muslims have as yet realized the fact. They do not yet see that it is impossible to secure a healthy society and nation by applying the institutions of the Arabia of the seventh century to modern life. Such difficulties cannot arise where Christianity is understood ; for Christ gave us principles which can be applied in innumerable forms to the detailed needs of men in all circumstances.

Secondly, the method of Christ gives each people freedom, allows them to build up the fabric of their social life according to their national genius. The systems remain Christian, so long as they are guided in every detail by the spiritual principles of Jesus. But that is not all. The complement to the freedom of the Church is the constant presence and activity of the Holy Spirit :

He will guide you into all truth.1

The Church, in freedom, faithfully seeking and following the guidance of the Spirit of Christ in applying the universal

[FOOTNOTE] 1 John 16, 13.

{60}

truths taughtL-hy— Jesus to the details of life, thought, and worship, finds her way into health and righteousness.

The sheer originality of the method of Jesus in these matters is unparalleled. No other teacher approaches Him. Students will note how consistently He maintained this atti tude : in all circumstances He remains the universal religious teacher; He refuses to become a mere legislator. In full conformity with this position, He also refused to act as judge. In the case of the man who asked Him to adjudicate in the matter of the family property between himself and his brother, He said,

Who made me a judge or a divider over you ? l

and in the painful case of the woman brought before Him for adultery He so acted that her accusers, accused by their own consciences, slunk away ; and the woman found in Jesus not a judge to condemn her, but the Saviour of both her body and her soul.2

The New Testament itself presents us with a practical example of the out-working of these principles which may be of service to us. The original disciples of Christ were all Jews; but soon the Good News was told to Gentiles and many responded. The first impulse of the Christian leaders was to make these converts into Jews and to impose the whole Jewish law upon them. But some protested ; and finally the whole Church was led, in part by Peter, but in the main by Paul, to see that Christ Himself was all-sufficient for them without the law.3 Hence the perfect freedom we have in Christ.

What was sufficient for the infant churches of Syria, Asia Minor, Greece, and Italy will assuredly prove sufficient for India, China, and Japan. We need not impose on them our elaborate theologies, our detailed canon law, or the particulars of our ritual, or the forms of our society. It is a hard

[FOOTNOTE] 1 Luke 12, 13, 14. 2 John 8, l-n.

[FOOTNOTE] 3 Acts 15, 1-31.

{61}

task to distinguish in full wisdom the vital spirit from the phenomenal dress ; but the will to die to all that is only our own will enable us to hear the voice of the Spirit of Jesus and to recognize what is merely racial, national, sectional, local, or temporary in our conception of Christ and His gospel. It is far easier to work this out in practice than in theory. Indeed it has been already done in many a community. Then, the more progress Christians make in co-operation, federation, and union, in conscious loyalty to Christ's principle of freedom,1 on the one hand, and to His dying prayer for unity,2 on the other, the more easy will it be to make this difficult yet altogether necessary distinction. Hence, in seeking to trans fuse the life of Christ into the Hindu people, Christians must be constantly on their guard, laying aside all that is merely Western or temporary, and offering only the Bread of Life Himself.

F. We would invite the Hindu also to distinguish and dis cern. People sometimes write and speak as if it were the policy of missionaries to impose imperiously the whole of their own religious, civil, and social life unchanged upon the people of India. Such a policy would be downright tyranny, and if successful would be seriously subversive of national life. But such a thing is neither possible nor desirable. Serious Christians, above all, do not dream of doing such violence to the spirit of man. We are very fully conscious of the imper fections of the Christianity of England and of every other country of the West. We do not imagine that we or any other group of men have 'attained'; but we do hold most seriously that in Christ we have something which the nations need. The education and the science of England or of Germany are not perfect ; yet India, China, and Japan are adopting Western education and Western science as fast as they possibly can. The Government of Britain is by no means perfect, yet every awakened nation of the East, Muslim, Hindu, Buddhist, or Confucian, is panting after British freedom. 1 Matt. 17, 24-26. 2 John 17, 20-23.

{62}

Spiritual religion can be absorbed without loss of nationality, as truly as these other activities of the human mind. If the intellectual life of the West is necessary for the welfare of the East, much more are the principles of Christ necessary for the healing of the nations.

There can be no such thing as a national acceptance of Christ. He cannot be received by men en masse. Each soul must turn in its bare individual personality to find union with Him. The only cry possible is:

Rock of Ages, cleft for me, Let me hide myself in Thee.

Hence, no existing nation is anything like fully Christian. A certain percentage of the population surrender to Him ; others yield only a partial allegiance, and some even consciously oppose Him. The moral and spiritual standard which Christ lays upon the human soul is so high and so exacting that the worldly man rebels, and many seek to belong to Him and yet to escape the more serious aspects of His Lordship. Hence no Christian country fully represents Christ. His power must not be measured by any land. We make fullest confession of all the evils visible in the life of Christian countries in the West. Hindus often write and speak of these things, but they are far more painfully present to the Christian mind. Yet these things do not prove that Christ has failed.

The example of Israel is sufficient to prove that a nation may possess truth of the highest value to all the world, and yet a large part of the people may fail to use it in their lives. The Old Testament is the record of the supreme religious revelation of the ancient world, yet the disobedience of the bulk of the people is the most constant feature of their history. On the other hand, the core of the nation was true to Jahveh ; and in them, above all, but also in the whole people, the wonderful work of God is manifest. So in the West. Despite our pitiable failure, there is abundance in our life to show the supremacy of Christ. The West surpasses all the world in

{63}

practical philanthropy, in eager endeavours to serve men, in the uprightness and purity of its government, and in general efficiency. This last quality which the East longs so vehe mently to possess is largely the result of two Christian forces, the position of woman in the family and society, and the general purity of public administration ; both of which spring from the depth and clearness of Christ's ethic. The mere fact that all the nations of the East now wish to copy the West is proof of the mighty dynamic at work there. But the thoughtful man will test Christ not by the Western world as a whole but by its Christian core, and there he will recognize the constant presence of a high and great type of character, distinguished chiefly by heroic service of mankind and by the full reconciliation of the highest culture the world knows with full faith in Christ.

But there is another point to be noticed. However faithful any single country might be to Christ, it could not interpret Him fully. He is human ; and the riches that are in Him can be set forth only by the united efforts of the whole human family. There are many elements in His life and teaching which are acknowledged by the Church, yet have never been fully worked out in thought or in life :

We are but broken lights of Thee.

But a new age is dawning. We see Jesus already crowned with many crowns ; but we do not yet see all things put under Him. But in this new age on which we have entered His Kingdom will continue to extend rapidly, until

All kings shall fall down before him : All nations shall serve him.1

Then much that is now but promise will find concrete exposi tion and embodiment, and the glory and universality of our Lord will be placed beyond cavil. How much will be possible, when the whole world acknowledges, even with meagre intelli-

[FOOTNOTE] 1 Ps. 72, ii.

{64}

gence, the Lordship of Christ? How many reforms will inevitably come? How much uplifting of the fallen, whether individuals or peoples ? How many forms of change will then come within the range of possibility ?

Then will the wonderful religious genius of India reveal its power anew in its interpretation of Christ. Aspects of His example and of His message which are latent in the West will in India find free and full expression. May not Christ's attitude to poverty find glorious illumination, His deep sense of the meaning and the sacredness of society be exhibited to the world by a people set free from Caste indeed, yet reaping its fruits as never before, and the prayer and communion with His Father to which Jesus so often gave His nights be turned to priceless account by the descendants of the rishis and yogis ? Aspects of Christ which the hard practical West has failed to utilize will prove fruitful beyond our dreams in the Christian experience of the richly dowered Hindu race.

Hence, in this volume, in setting forth Christianity as the Crown of Hinduism, we shall restrict ourselves to Christ Himself, drawing our evidence only from His own life and teaching, and from those parts of the Old Testament which He accepted without alteration. If we use a sentence here and there from the Apostles, we do so only to further illustrate the meaning of Christ.

It has been rather difficult to decide in what order the various aspects of Hinduism ought to be reviewed ; for each has influenced the others in turn. But, since karma is the one principle which has leavened every part of the religion, it necessarily had to be dealt with early. On the other hand, it is clear that the chief religious ideas behind the Hindu family took form before the rise of the karma theory ; and, in the main, they have continued to act as if there were no such doctrine. Hence the family is taken first and karma next. There is one other fragment of the religion which has

{65}

come very little under the influence of karma, namely the life of the vanaprastha ; but, as that is bound by so many ties to the life of the sannydsi, it seemed better to take them together and simply to point out the historical circumstances in which the rule arose.1 The reasons for the order of the other chapters lie on the surface.

[FOOTNOTE] 1 See below, pp. 249-253.

=== Chapter V (starts on p. 211)

{211}

CHAPTER V

THE ESSENTIALS OF HINDUISM

I. WHEN the invading Aryans entered India they merely sought lands on which to settle and live. For a considerable length of time they were content with small things. But gradually there arose among them the imperial instinct, and as a result they became masters, politically and religiously, of the whole of North India, and, at a later elate, of the South also.

In the course of their gradual conquest of the North the simple religion of the Rigveda was transformed into Hinduism. The thought and culture of the invaders were spontaneously advancing ; the impact of the innumerable tribes of aborigines with their varied religions and modes of life necessarily brought them much fresh material and vital quickening ; while their new imperial position demanded a practical system applicable to their subjects as well as to themselves. In these circumstances a new set of beliefs arose and a new social and religious organization took form. Hinduism, the religion of India, was born. Innumerable changes have taken place since then ; but they have all been within the lines of the original plan ; they have all been branches of the primeval tree.

Our study of the life of the early Indo-Aryans left us with several ideas clearly defined before our minds. Their religion was a polytheistic worship of the powers of nature by means of prayer, hymn, and sacrifice, but without temples or images. We also found a few traces of a more spiritual faith O 3

{212}

and of philosophic speculation. The worship of ancestors held a large place in their minds and in their social organiza tion. To this simple people the world was real and life was good. Men prayed to live a hundred years. Asceticism was unknown. The family was still in a healthy condition. There was no caste. There was no doctrine of transmigration. Man lived and died once, and after death was led by Yama to heaven, where he enjoyed an immortality of bliss with the ' fathers ' and the gods. From this simple system was developed the elaborate theology and highly organized com munity of Hinduism.

It was the doctrine of karma and rebirth that gave character and form to the new system. While on the surface it is but a theory of birth and death, it is essentially the Hindu moral theory ; and, as we have already seen, it enters as an element into every part of the religion.

There was another doctrine which proved of importance in the creation of the new thought, but it did not exercise such an influence as the transmigration theory did. The idea is that there exists one supreme divine Being, eternal and unknowable, who is manifested in all the gods and all the religions of men. He is spiritual and real ; he is in nature and in man ; he is the cause of all things, the Veda and caste included ; in a sense, he is all things ; and yet he is free from karma, which controls all things. Since he stands apart from karma, he is actionless. Being unknowable, he cannot be worshipped ; but, since he is manifested in all the gods, the worship of any god is quite legitimate. The Brahmans thus developed a simple philosophy of religion which they used to explain matters to themselves and to all eager inquirers, as they proceeded with their work of bringing the peoples of India under their influence. They must have met with many forms of religion, some of them very strange indeed, as they extended their sway over the land ; yet every form of belief and every cult could be brought under this simple formula. It is this idea of the one God behind all the gods which the

{213}

Hindu villager uses to-day when any one asks him why he acknowledges many gods.

But the more clearly they envisaged the Supreme as real, the more worthless the world became to them. Thus, ever since these ideas took form, the Hindu has held that all worldly things are vain, valueless, empty, as compared with God. The doctrine that all material things are illusion is a much later development, and is not a necessary part of essential Hinduism ; but the worthlessness of the world is one of the central ideas of the religion.

But while in comparison with God the world was seen to be paltry, in the light of the doctrine of karma and rebirth, it was held to be eternal, coeval with God. It was a transitory, phenomenal system, completely controlled by karma, yet without beginning and without end. The course of the world's history is a continuous process of degeneration from the Golden down to the Iron age. Progress is impossible. But when things reach their worst, the whole world passes into invisibility and lies in peace and silence for countless ages; and, when it is re-manifested, things are once more at their best.

All souls, whether living as gods, demons, men, animals, or plants, are afloat on the stream of transmigration (sai'nsara). Their life is at once retribution for the past and opportunity for the future. But, though a man may rise by persistent good conduct, by sacrifice and austerity, to the highest position among men or even to the station of a god, release from the ever-whirling wheel of birth and death is not to be won by an ordinary life, but only by stepping out of the common course of existence into the life of world- renunciation.

The gods may be worshipped, in accordance with the old cult, by means of sacrifice, prayer, and hymn, conducted in the open air, or by means of temple and image; but, whether the old or the new method is followed, only a Brahman is allowed to officiate as priest ; and the Vedas must be acknow ledged as the one Revelation. It must be noticed, however,

{214}

that the old cult is open only to the three twice-born castes, and no woman can sacrifice without her husband ; while all Hindu temples are open to the four castes and to women as well as men.1

Caste is the Hindu form of social organization. No man can be a Hindu who is not in caste ; and if a group of outsiders is admitted into the community, they must organize themselves as a caste.

In the times of the Rigveda there were schools for young priests. These grew in importance with the growth of the ritual and of the power of the priests. More and more literature had to be mastered by the priestly student. Only the Brahman could teach, and only men of the three highest castes were admitted to the schools. All women were excluded. During this period of reconstruction it became the custom to send every boy of the Brahman, Kshatriya, and Vaisya castes to school to receive the sacred education. Each boy underwent initiation before beginning his course. Nowa days very few indeed receive the old education.

This radical system was held by the Brahmans and taught by them, in whole or in part, according to circumstances, as they pursued their work of subjugating the races of India to their authority. The ignorant were taught only as much as was necessary to enable them to take their place in the great organization ; but, when thinking men asked questions, an answer was ready for them. This system of thought and life will not be found in this cut-and-dried form, separated from all else, in any Hindu manual ; yet it lies behind every form of Indian religion and philosophy which appears on the stage of history throughout the centuries. In Buddhism, Jainism, the Sankhya philosophy and the great sects, one or other element has been somewhat modified ; yet the forms of these systems would scarcely be comprehensible to us, did we not know the great ancestor from which they sprang.

II. The leading constituents of this system will be found to 1 See above, p. 164.

{215}

fit very well together. If we hold that the invisible God behind all things takes no part in the activity of the phenomenal universe, then we can readily believe that the whole world is destitute of worth and substance. Again, if the world is so distinctly a vain show, it is not unnatural to think that souls, once caught in its meshes, may live beclouded and dazzled for ages, finding no way back to the divine Source, until their blind eyes are opened to see through the shows of Time to the one Reality. In these circumstances caste appears at once reasonable and right, as marking stages of the soul's progress towards enlightenment. The advance of the soul is of so much moment that the social system may well be made stern and unyielding, in order to conserve gains as they are made ; and the spiritual advance ment which is believed to lie behind the birth of every Brahman is quite a reasonable basis for the religious authority which is demanded for him. Similarly, the conception that the Veda is the eternal utterance of the divine Mind, revealed anew in divers portions to the Rishis at the opening of every world-era, is a reasonable ground for the practical authority claimed for it.

Perhaps the most noticeable thing about the system is the way in which it fits practically into the circumstances of the time. It is, first of all, the old system to which the people were accustomed ; for it is the religion of the Rigveda ; yet it is so transformed as to satisfy the intellect of the most advanced Aryans of the day. It is, on the other hand, a philosophy of religion, which enables the grossest of the pagan cults of the aborigines to be included in the same imperial system with the highest speculations of philosophy and with the elaborate sacrificial performances of the Brahmans. Had there been no caste to bind the people together, the speculative religious ideas would have been ineffectual ; while, without the doctrine of transmigration, caste would have had no intellectual or moral justification and could have never laid hold of the popular conscience.

{216}

The strength and greatness of the whole group of ideas will be at once apparent. The thought of the worthlessncss of the world in contrast with the glory and spirituality of Brahman is one that lays hold of the intellect and has many interests for philosophy. The emptiness of the world is a powerful moral conception, and has been one of the chief sources of all the forms of spiritual religions which India has exhibited during the centuries. Every religion has found it necessary to persuade man to seek emancipation from the power of the sense-world. Hinduism has no need to search for reasons to support this teaching : it springs inevitably from the Hindu conception of things. Then, on the other hand, if the system deprives the world of all claim to final reality, the doctrine of transmigration and karma expresses in the most powerful way possible its actuality and its grip over the human spirit. The unbending, remorseless law of karma has a cosmic grandeur and a kind of scientific com pleteness about it which at first sight are very captivating. Given these conceptions, the elaborate organization and the strict rules of caste appeal to the thinking mind as an orderly and reasonable system.

Here, then, we have the Hindu world-theory in all its permanent essentials : God real, the world worthless ; the one God unknowable, the other gods not to be despised ; the Brahmans with their Vedas the sole religious authority; caste a divine institution, serving as the chief instrument of reward and punishment ; man doomed to repeated birth and death, because all action leads to rebirth ; world-flight the only noble course for the awakened man and the one hope of escape from the entanglements of sense and transmigration.

III. We have been accustomed to think of Hinduism as an unchanging system, the home of all the conservatisms. Now, it is very true that the Hindu seeks to live in most things precisely as his ancestors lived centuries ago ; yet conserva tism and stagnation are not the. whole story. In Hinduism there are certain large freedoms. To the European these

{217}

liberties are at first sight worthless: the Hindu seems to be free where he ought to be bound and bound where he ought to be free. Yet, rightly or wrongly, there are these freedoms ; and, in order to understand Hinduism and its working, it is most necessary to realize what parts of Hindu life are free and what parts are under stern regulation. In this chapter we isolate the things which are regarded by the Hindu as eternal, and therefore as allowing of no liberty.

The ordinances to which a Hindu must conform fall into three groups : the family, caste, and religion.

A. An orthodox Hindu must have been born in a Hindu family, must have undergone all the necessary ceremonies as a child and young man, and must continue to live as a member of his family, obeying all the regulations and fulfilling all the duties of a householder. These duties include the family rites mentioned in our second chapter, viz. the sacraments, the worship of ancestors, the worship of the family gods, and the observance of the annual feasts and seasons of worship. If he is a twice-born Hindu, he ought also to observe daily, morning and evening, the prescribed ablutions, prayers and offerings.

B. An orthodox Hindu must have been born in a Hindu caste, must have undergone initiation if he is a Brahman, Kshatriya, or Vaisya, or some other equivalent ceremony if he belongs to a lower caste ; and he must continue to observe all the rules and regulations which are traditional in his own caste, as was set forth in Chapter IV.

C. An orthodox Hindu must worship the gods either in the old Vedic fashion or in the temples. He must acknow ledge the Vedas as the one revelation, and he must employ Brahmans for all priestly duties, whether in his home or elsewhere. No one but a Brahman can sacrifice, conduct religious ceremonies, act as a religious teacher, or proclaim the law.

All this, then, is obligatory. on the Hindu. In these matters he is bound. The observance of these laws and customs is

{218}

called dJianna, i.e. right conduct. Dharma is explained and discussed in detail in the books known as Dfiantiasastras, the greatest of which is the Manava DJiarmasdstra or code of Manu. Here is what is laid down on this point by the highest authorities. We quote the Glta first :

Therefore, realizing the sastra to be the standard for determining right and wrong, thou should'st do here the works specified in the ordinances of the sastra^

Then Sankara :

The knowledge of one action being right and another wrong is based on scripture only.2

The liberties of the Hindu are outside the circle of dharma. A man may remain an orthodox Hindu without believing in any god or any theology, and without knowing or reading any sacred book. He may be a Christian, a Muhammadan, an agnostic, or an atheist in his convictions. No question is raised so long as he conforms to usage.

[FOOTNOTE] 1 xvi. 24. " S.B.E., xxxviii. 131.

=== Chapter X (starts on p. 421)

{421}

III. The brief outline of the growth of the Indian belief in incarnations given in our last chapter brings us into close touch with one of the most powerful forces working in Hin duism. In these matters we do not deal merely with the ideas of individuals, or of isolated groups of individuals, but with those hidden powers which refuse to submit to the control of man, and work out, in the course of the centuries, vast historical results. That the doctrine of incarnation, which appeared originally in the ancient Vishnuite sect, should have found its way into almost every division of the Hindu people, and into every corner of Eastern Asia, is the strongest possible testimony to the religious value it possesses for the Hindu and the Asiatic spirit. Nor can there be any doubt as to what clement in the doctrine it is that has given the movement its power : it is the belief that God actually appeared as a man, was born, and lived and died among men. This fact comes out quite clearly in the literature ; but it becomes still more manifest in intercourse with the people.

A. We must now note and seek to understand certain rather remarkable modifications which the incarnation doctrine has been undergoing in the minds of educated Hindus for some time. It has been both narrowed and widened.

It will be recollected that in both the great sects it has

{422}

been usual for centuries to call every outstanding leader an incarnation. Sathakopa, Yamunacharya, and Ramanuja among Vishnuites, Sankara, Svetacharya, and Nilakantha among Sivaites, and scores of minor saints and scholars of these and other sects, have been recognized as avataras for several centuries. No thoughtful Hindu would press this seriously to-day. It is too big a stretch to ask any one to believe that Vishnu's necklace or his discus took human birth. It is quite true that a few enthusiastic disciples have called Ramakrishna Paramaharhsa and Mrs. Besant avataras ; but no thoughtful man takes such a proposal as a piece of theology : it is merely a way of testifying to their great services to Hinduism. Faith in the animal incarnations of Vishnu has also disappeared. It is simply impossible for the modern man to believe that God appeared on earth in the form of a monster, half-man, half-lion. These things arc too clearly mythology to be believed to-day.

The only incarnations which the modern Hindu attempts to hold by seriously are Rama and Krishna. He may give some sort of acknowledgement to earlier stories, but he docs not vouch for them. Rama and Krishna, however, he does defend. Indeed, one of the most significant things in Neo- Hindu literature is this, that books have been written to attempt to prove that the accounts given in the Epics of Rama and Krishna are historical.1 Thinking men have realized that, unless these things can be shown to be really historical, the old incarnation faith cannot but disappear. These books make sorry reading ; and no wonder ; for they undertake an impossible task. During the last few years Hindus have usually contented themselves with bold assertions : so far as the writer knows, no serious treatise on the subject has been published recently.

On the other hand, there has been a very significant widen ing of the old idea, so as to cover Christ, Muhammad, Confucius,

[FOOTNOTE] 1 For an account of some of this literature see the Appendix to the present writer's Gltd and Gospel.

{423}

and other religious leaders ; and many a modern Hindu believes that he holds a philosophy of religion not only reasonable but liberal, because he acknowledges all the great teachers of mankind to have been incarnations. Such a theory draws out one's sympathy very deeply. The modern man cannot get on without a working theory of religion covering all the phenomena. But what a change this registers in Hindu belief! Buddha was long ago acknowledged to have been an incarnation of Vishnu, but only in the sense that Vishnu became embodied as Buddha to deceive men and seduce them into a false religion. Here we have all the great religions of the world acknowledged as good, and as having been founded by real incarnations. Do Hindus realize what a revolution in Hindu thought and practice the sincere accep tance of such a doctrine would involve ?

B. We cannot wonder at this serious unsettlcment of opinion ; for our study of the history has made it absolutely plain that all Indian stories of incarnation are baseless. Rama, Krishna, and Gautama the Buddha, as they appear in the earliest literature, are men, and men only, indeed, are as far from being incarnations as any men could possibly be. Rama and Krishna are not even religious leaders in any sense : they are but kings and warriors ; and it was only some three hundred years after their appearance in literature that the belief arose that they were incarnations. It was much later still before they were called full incarnations of the Supreme. In the case of Gautama, the Buddha, the history is rather different. He was one of the greatest religious leaders the world has ever seen. A large section of the human race still draw their religious inspiration from him. But his system was deter minedly opposed to the ideas that lie behind incarnation. To have thought of himself as an incarnate god would have been revolting to him ; and it was at least five hundred years after his death before his followers dared associate his name with the doctrine of the one living God. Only on the basis of such a doctrine was the idea of incarnation possible. Gautama

{424}

had been five hundred years dead before he was called an avatara. Thus every Indian incarnation story is a myth.

Philosophic Hinduism is independent of history : no matter when or by whom the ideas were first expressed, they retain their intrinsic value. Hindus are keenly conscious of this fact and often refer to it. But the principle does not apply to the belief in incarnations : the very pith of the doctrine is the appearance of God in human history. As we have seen, the power the doctrine wields over the Hindu heart springs from the belief that at certain definite times God was born, lived, and died as a man in India.

Hence, since every single Hindu incarnation is altogether mythical, the doctrine is dying, and will inevitably pass away. The changes it has undergone in the educated mind during the last half-century are symptoms of its dying condition.

Nor can the patriotic Hindu wish the doctrine to survive. He cannot desire that the poor of the people should be fed with mythology. A strong Indian nation can never be bred on such diet.

C. It is the spirit of the West that has wrought these changes in the incarnation doctrine. Two forms of Western influence have been specially active in this part of Hinduism. First, the sense of history has laid hold of the most cultured men, and has led them to study the growth of Hinduism frankly and openly. Hence, some have been found to confess that the incarnation tales are mythical. But most say nothing on the subject, or, like Barikim Chandra Chatterji, try to persuade themselves and others that the man-god Krishna is historical. Secondly, the presentation of the historical Jesus has produced very large results. His sure place in the world's history, His personal claims, His boundless personal interest, and the historical grip of the New Testament have proved very potent in rousing the Hindu mind.

D. On the other hand, the acceptance of these incarnation stories by such vast multitudes of the people of India and of Eastern Asia is all the more significant, when we realize how

{425}

baseless they are. How deep and how powerful must the instinct be to which these mythical stories are a response ! The instinct for the living God is undoubtedly the deepest and most insistent of all our natural religious faculties ; but, clearly, amongst those that come next none is more vivid or more powerful than the longing for God manifest in the flesh.

E. But the question now rises, If the avataras are all mythical, what are Hindus to do? Are they simply to drop the doctrine and do without it ? The large place it has held in Hinduism for more than two thousand years shows how highly the Hindu religious spirit appreciates the idea of GOD WITH us. To give it up would be to confess, not only that the Hindu mind mistook myth for history, but that it has been seriously mistaken in one of its chief religious intuitions. If we cannot trust the Hindu spirit in a large matter such as this, in what can we afford to trust it ?

F. The Christian standpoint is much less sceptical. The man who accepts Jesus as the incarnate Son of God certainly con fesses that the Hindu mind has mistaken the Rama and Krishna myths for history ; but he holds that the Hindu spirit was right in looking for God manifest in the flesh. Must not this be the attitude of the true Indian patriot ? In loyalty to truth he cannot but confess the incarnation stories to be mythical ; but, if he feels any confidence in the spiritual capacities of his people, he will expect to find in human history a real divine descent into human life. Thus Jesus, whose teaching so wonderfully crowns the ideas of Hinduism, is needed to give stability and reality to the Hindu belief in incarnations. Without Him, it must pass away like the base less fabric of a vision.

G. But have Christians any rational ground for asking the Hindu to accept Jesus as the incarnate Son of God? The following lines of thought may bring the foundations of Christian conviction before the reader.

i. Those who knew Jesus best declared that in Him they had seen God revealed. The whole of the New Testament is

{426}

evidence of what they thought and how strong their faith was. Here is what a modern historian says of the fact :

Where in the history of mankind can we find anything resembling this, that men who had eaten and drunk with their Master should glorify him, not only as the revealer of God, but as the Prince of life, as the Redeemer and Judge of the world, as the living power of its existence, and that a choir of Jews and Gentiles, Greeks and Barbarians, wise and foolish, should along with them immediately confess that out of the fullness of this one man they have received grace for grace ? *

2. The whole history of Christian influence in the world proves conclusively that Christian truth produces its charac teristic results on a community only when Jesus is recognized as the Son of God. Unitarianism is a beautiful plant, but it is always sickly. Hindus have an object lesson before their eyes in the vigour of the Christian Church as compared with the weakness of the Brahma Samaj.

3. When we turn to the teaching of Jesus, as handed down to us in the Gospels by His disciples, we find not only that Jesus calls Himself the Son of God, but that His teaching from beginning to end is steeped in such ideas as could have been held only by a mind that conceived itself as possessing divine authority.

(a) Jesus summons His hearers to personal surrender to Himself, to complete obedience, to public confession of their allegiance to Him, to readiness to suffer or even to die for His sake :

He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me ; and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me. And he that doth not take his cross and follow after me, is not worthy of me. He that findeth his life shall lose it ; and he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it.2

Why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things that I say ? 3

Every one therefore who shall confess me before men, him will I also confess before my Father which is in heaven.4

[FOOTNOTE] 1 Harnack, History of Dogma, i. 76.

[FOOTNOTE] 2 Matt. 10, 37-39. 3 Luke 6, 46. " Matt. 10, 32.

{427}

Blessed are ye when men shall reproach you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake.1

He also set Himself forth as the example which we should copy:

Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me ; for I am meek and lowly in heart : and ye shall find rest unto your souls.2

Now the strange thing is that men have discovered that, in order to live such a life as Jesus calls us to live, it is necessary not only to attend to His teaching carefully, but to surrender ourselves to Him as Lord in the precise way which the above texts prescribe. The demand of Jesus that we should give Him absolute obedience is verified as a right thing religiously, in Christian experience. Here is what Harnack says :

The Gospel can only be grasped and held firm by a believing self- surrender to the person of Christ.3

James Drummond, one of the leading Unitarian writers of recent years, says :

Jesus is, to the heart that loves him, 'a quickening spirit,' one who forms the interior life, and fills it with an abounding energy.4

What is implied in this wonderful spiritual relation between Christ and the soul ?

(b) That is precisely the question which Jesus Himself asks. He does not obtrude His person on us, but becomes our servant and helper, doing the more for us the more com pletely we yield to Him. Then He asks each one of us in the quiet of our own hearts the question which He asked of His disciples,

Who say ye that I am ? 5

(c) When first we make the acquaintance of Jesus, one of

[FOOTNOTE] 1 Matt. 5, II. 2 Matt. 11, 28-29.

[FOOTNOTE] 3 Dogmengeschichte, iii. 69. I owe this quotation to Mackintosh, Person of Jesus Christ, 347.

[FOOTNOTE] 4 Studies in Christian Doctrine, 291. See Mackintosh, 340. B Matt. 16, 15.

{428}

the things that puzzle us most is the fact that He usually calls Himself the Son of Man. Careful study reveals that He thought of Himself as the head of the human race, and that He felt Himself directly related to every man, woman, and child.1 He believed that every man needed Him :

And blessed is he, whosoever shall find none occasion of stumbling in me.2

As the Son of Man, He believed that He had authority on earth to forgive sin.3 Finally, He was convinced that, as the Son of Man, He must die for men :

For verily the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.4

(d) Feeling so keenly that all men needed His teaching and help, He said that His disciples, to whom He committed the carrying on of His work, occupied a position of the utmost responsibility with regard to all men ; and He urged them in the most solemn way to fulfil it :

Ye are the salt of the earth.5

Ye are the light of the world.6

Go ye, therefore, and make disciples of all the nations.7

(e) Since Jesus thought in this way about His life and work, we are not astonished to find that, in relation to the Jewish people, He called Himself the Messiah, and said that He had come to introduce the Kingdom of God. When He was tried by the Jewish Council, the President definitely asked Him the question. In reply He declared Himself the Messiah; and, finally, He allowed Himself to be crucified rather than give up the claim.

(/) In relation to God the Father, Jesus called Himself the Son, and He affirmed that He alone could reveal the Father : All things have been delivered unto me of my Father : and no one

[FOOTNOTE] 1 Matt. 25, 40-45. 2 Matt. 11, 6. 3 Mark 2, 10.

[FOOTNOTE] 4 Mark 10, 45. 5 Matt. 5, 13. 6 Matt. 5, 14.

[FOOTNOTE] 7 Matt. 28, 19.

{429}

knoweth who the Son 5s, save the Father ; and who the Father is, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son willeth to reveal him.1

These, in briefest, simplest form, are the foundations of the Christian conviction that Jesus is the incarnate Son of God. We do not talk of proving that He is the Son. Like all the deepest things of religion, this is a matter of moral and spiritual apprehension, not of logical demonstration. Jesus conies to every educated Hindu to-day, and says, ' In the light of all the history of Hinduism, of the history of the world, of my teaching, of my Cross, of your own religious experience, who say you that I am ? '

IV. The following paragraphs are intended to throw light on the relation in which the historic Christ stands to the mythical incarnations of India.

Poets sang of the avataras, and saints of many schools meditated on them, until a common portrait took definite form and became a national ideal ; so that the main features are found in the Krishna of the Gitd, the Buddha of the Saddharma Pnndarika, the Rama of Tulsl Das, and even in Manikka Vachakar's conception of the frequent theophanies of Siva.

A. The central conception of the doctrine is this, that God became a man, was born, lived, and died a man. Here, as we have seen, lies the real power of the whole movement over the mind and heart of India and of the other lands that have accepted it. There are many passages in the books which give expression to the sense of wonder which the belief creates, and the lowly adoration stirred by it. Thus, according to the Glta, when Krishna showed his transcendent form to Arjuna, the latter burst into a hymn of adoring praise, of which we quote a few stanzas :

Hail, hail to Thee ! a thousand times all hail ! Hail unto Thee ! again, again all hail !

In power boundless, measureless in strength, Thou holdest all : then Thou Thyself art All.

[FOOTNOTE] 1 Luke 10, 22.

{430}

If, thinking Thee but friend, importunate,

[FOOTNOTE] 0 Krishna ! or O Yadava ! O friend !

1 cried, unknowing of Thy majesty,

And careless in the fondness of my love ;

If jesting, I irreverence showed to Thee, At play, reposing, sitting or at meals, Alone, O sinless One, or with my friends, Forgive my error, O Thou boundless One.

Therefore I fall before Thee ; with my body I worship as is fitting ; bless Thou me. As father with the son, as friend with friend, With the beloved as lover, bear with me.1

We see the influence of the same emotions in the passionate love of Hindus for the baby Krishna and the innumerable idols of the little crawling boy to be found in Indian homes all over the country. So Tulsi Das is filled with wondering reverence for the humility and condescension of Rama in being born a man ; and Manikka Vachakar is never done pouring out his praises to Siva for the love and self-humilia tion of his theophanies.

Yet, in the case of every Indian incarnation, the humanity assumed by the god is unreal. His human body is but a dis guise ; his human weakness and emotion are assumed ; his limitations are but a pretence. The glory of the Supreme is scarcely dimmed by the muddy vesture of human flesh in which for the moment the great Actor robes himself. To the Hindu anything beyond this would seem to be unworthy of the Highest. There is never the idea that the incarnate God was confined to human conditions or limited to the powers of human nature. In the Gltd all the stress is laid on the divinity of Krishna : he has a man-like form, but he is never conceived as a true man. He is always the god concealed in the seemingly human form.

We meet the same conceptions of Gautama in the Sad- dharma Pundarika. Everything that he does is llld, sport.

[FOOTNOTE] 1 xi. 39-44. Mrs. Besant's translation.

{431}

His coming to earth and his passing to Nirvana are mere pretences : he remains all the time on Gridhrakuta. His death is but a device, an expedient, a piece of deceit, necessary for the good of men.

Similar phrases are used by Manikka Vachakar of Siva. All his operations, whether in the universe or in the soul, are only sport, lild. They are typified in his dance. All his theophanies are illusion. He is constantly called the great Deceiver. He appears and works as a cooly, as a groom among horses, and in various other ways ; but on each occasion he is the god disporting himself: there is no human toil, no true human experience.

The same terms reappear in Tulsl Das. All that Rama does is sport. He is an actor ; he is the great master of the unreal ; he constantly uses his deceptive, illusive power. He pretends to feel pain, sorrow, astonishment, or pleasure, but it is all mere acting:

For the sake of his faithful people, the very God, our lord Rama, has become incarnate as a king and for our supreme sanctification has lived as it were the life of any ordinary man. As an actor in the course of his performance assumes a variety of dresses and exhibits different characters, but himself remains the same ; such, Garuda, is Rama's divertissement, a bewilderment to the demons, but a delight to the faithful.1

In the case of Jesus, however, the very reverse is true. He was truly a man. He was no actor, no sportive illusionist. All was actual from beginning to end. He was born a helpless babe and grew in knowledge as He grew in body.2 As a baby, He had no divine powers to display to a terrified mother, like Rama in Tulsl Das's poem.3 By the age of twelve, He knew and loved His heavenly Father, but He was subject to His parents.4 He was trained as a carpenter,5 and toiled at the bench, earning bread for Himself, His mother, and the others by the sweat of His brow. There was no divine power used

[FOOTNOTE] 1 Growse, 533. 2 Luke 2, 40. 3 Growse, 96-97.

[FOOTNOTE] 4 Luke 2, 41-51. 6 Mark 6,3.

{432}

to lighten His labour. It was no few minutes of pretended toil, like Siva's cooly labour. He made yokes and ploughs and such-like. until He was thirty years of age,1 thus ennobling and hallowing all manual labour for man.

Throughout His public life He remained a real man, our brother, living our common human life under all the restric tions and limitations which narrow and shut us in. He was homeless,2 suffered from thirst,3 from hunger,4 from fatigue.5 His knowledge was limited : He frequently asked for informa tion, never making any pretence of ignorance, and once at least He said He did not know.6 Miraculous powers were given Him for His work, but they were always used to help others, never once for Himself, not even in the hunger that followed a forty days' fast,7 not even in the agonies of crucifixion.8 His favourite name for Himself was ' the Son of Man '. It is the glory of the Son of Man that He shared all the toil, sorrow and sufferings of His brothers and sisters of the human race.9

We here reach the point where the divergence between the Hindu incarnate ideal and Christ is at its greatest. ' How can Jesus be divine, since he was crucified ? If he had been divine, he could have easily overcome his murderers. God cannot be defeated by man.' In such wise has many a Hindu argued. The Jews who stood round the Cross argued in the same way :

And it was the third hour, and they crucified him. And the super scription of his accusation was written over, THE KING OF THE JEWS. And with him they crucify two robbers ; one on his right hand, and one on his left. And they that passed by railed on him, wagging their heads, and saying, Ha ! thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three days, save thyself, and come down from the cross. In like manner also the chief priests mocking him among themselves with the scribes said, He saved others ; himself he cannot save. Let the Christ, the King of Israel, now come down from the cross, that we may see and believe.10

[FOOTNOTE] 1 Luke 3, 23. '2 Matt. 8, 20. 3 John 4, 7.

[FOOTNOTE] 4 Matt. 4, 2. 5 John 4, 6. 6 Matt. 24, 36. 7 Matt. 4, 4.

[FOOTNOTE] 8 Matt. 27, 39-44. ' 9 Heb. 2, 14-18. 10 Mark 15, 25-32,

{433}

But is it not evident that, if Jesus came to earth to be the Saviour, it was His duty to save others, not Himself? The innermost secret of Christ's method is this, that He gives Himself up in self-sacrifice to win the sinner back to God. The Crucifixion is only the final exhibition before all the world of what had been going on in the life of Jesus from the beginning :

For the Son of man came not to be served but to be a servant, and to give his life a ransom for many.1

The devout Hindu will probably be sore amazed at the idea of the incarnate One being truly a man ; for it stands wide apart from Hindu conceptions. But here, in the central mystery of the Word become flesh and the only-begotten and well-beloved Son self-devoted on the Cross, lies the very heart of the Christian faith, the very fountain-head of the Christian life.

The Indian religious instinct divined that God would become man, but did not realize the depths of the divine humility and self-sacrifice. The main idea is right, but the detailed out working is a failure. Even at its best Hindu incarnation is no true incarnation ; God only seems to become man. Even if by some writers the human body be conceived as a reality, God has not become man, but only appears within a human shell. In Christ, on the other hand, the Son of God actually becomes man, shares our pains and sorrows, our temptations and moral difficulties, and lives under the same conditions as we do. Thus, Jesus fulfils the Indian thought. He is the realization of the Indian ideal ; but in this case, as in every other, the reality sent by God is far better and more wonderful than the imagination of man.

B. The character of the incarnate One is described with a good deal of detail in some of the books, and is regarded by modern Hindus as a matter of considerable moment. It has two aspects.

[FOOTNOTE] 1 Matt. 20, 28. E c

{434}

(a) The idea that the incarnate One should be an example to men scarcely occurs in the literature. Yet for many centuries the Rdmdyana of Valmiki has been used as a mirror of character, Rama being regarded as the ideal man and husband, and Sita as the ideal wife. Fortunate is the Hindu people in having this piece of literature. Rama and his faithful wife are indeed beautiful and healthy examples of Hindu life. Men of every race will heartily admire them. Yet it would be unwise to think of them as likely to exercise any serious ethical influence on the world. They are good Hindus ; and there is much that is noble and helpful in their characters ; but they do not lead the van of human life. It is also necessary to note that it is the original part of the poem, in which Rama and Sita are still purely human characters, that has proved fruitful in this regard.

From the time when Rama and Krishna were thought of as the Deity incarnate, there is no longer any idea that their earthly life can afford moral examples to men. That is the reason why the Gitd says not a word about the earthly life of Krishna beyond what is implied in the situation. If we wanted to study the character and behaviour attributed to him in. the literature, we should have to turn to the Mahabharata and the Pitranas ; and there the material is the very opposite of promising. Fortunately, we are saved the trouble of dealing with it ; for the Bhdgavata Ptirdna, one of the chief Krishnaite authorities, warns us in the most serious way that men must on no account imitate the actions of gods. Tulsi Das fully concurs in this judgement. Both passages have been already quoted.1

In spite of this solemn warning, a modern Hindu, roused to emulation by the Christian attitude to Christ, has written a work called The Imitation of Srikrishna. It is a daily text book, consisting of extracts from the Gltd, the MahdbJidrata, and the very book which condemns such imitation, the Bhdgavata Purdna.

] Above, pp. 394-395-

{435}

In order to avoid misunderstanding, we may point out that in the Bhagavadgtta the actionless action of the transcendental Krishna-Brahman is put forward as an example of karma-yoga for men to follow. This is not the action of the incarnate One, however.

(b] But the character and life of the Incarnate are every where regarded as a revelation of the unknowable Brahman, whether he be construed as personal or impersonal. The outlines of this character are described in the various books with a good deal of unanimity.

His most prominent trait is sportiveness : he is full of play, tricks, and pretences. His illusive power enables him to do anything and to appear in any guise. One never knows what he will do next. In this way all the old mythology, which was current about Siva, Vishnu, Rama, and Krishna before the doctrine of incarnations and of humanitarian theophanics arose, is retained, and is used to give variety to the character and incident to the life. Next in importance comes his indifference. He has the same feeling to every creature born. He is as kind to the evil as to the good. The Glta says he neither loves nor hates. Although he is always active, his activity is not purposeful action, but mere sport. Hence he is always at peace. Thus far the character is precisely the same as that attributed to the Atman in the Upanishads.

But, where God is conceived as personal, other traits appear in the character of the incarnate One. He is compassionate toward all, and is ready to give his grace to those who show devotion to him. He is their refuge, friend, and comforter ; and he is ready to release them from sin. From the time of the Tamil poet-saints the Incarnate is always said to be a god of love. Hence the statement of the Glta quoted above is not repeated. Manikka Vachakar frequently insists on Siva's humility, and Tills! Das thinks similarly of Rama. Finally, Manikka speaks of Siva as having suffered for men, and Tulsl Das also emphasizes the sufferings of Rama.

It is a most remarkable fact that the characteristic features E e 2

{436}

of the most beautiful moral ideal ever created in India, namely, the ideal for ascetics, which we have already dealt with, was never ascribed to the incarnate One. World-renunciation, self- effacement, meekness, gentleness, forgiveness, and endurance were the marks of the monk, but were not thought of as characteristic of the avatara, the reason being that he was always the divine in human disguise, never a real man.

We now turn from these wonderful creations of the Hindu religious imagination to the character of the historical Jesus.

(1) As He was truly a man, His character is genuinely human. We watch the growth of His moral nature ; and we recognize in Him all the strain and struggle which we experience ourselves. His character grew gradually to ripe ness. He had to fight His way upward against temptations, just as we have to do ; only He never yielded, but kept free from all sin. He was dependent upon His Father as ordinary men are. This becomes completely apparent when we study His prayer- life. He struggled to learn and to do the will of His Father, putting down the human heart, which tended to rebel against the awful ordeal He had to pass through. He prayed whole nights, and cried to His Father with tears and mighty wrestlings of spirit. In fighting temptation and enduring persecution He learned obedience, and won His way to the perfection of the full moral stature.

(2) The most extraordinary fact about His character is this, that He, in whom the moral ideal was so lofty and so exacting, who knew sin so thoroughly as to hate it perfectly, who demanded repentance, and brought so many to it, never expresses any consciousness of sin, never shows the slightest trace of repentance or confession. Clearly He was that supremest miracle, a sinless soul. Through boyhood, youth, and manhood He lived so close to His Father that He was kept utterly pure. It is this above all things that sets Him apart from the greatest of men. He alone was utterly with out stain. In Him the moral ideal was realized. He is the fairest of the sons of men, yea altogether lovely. Men of all

{437}

nations have recognized that the character of Jesus is perfect, that there is no difference between His teaching and His life.

(3) Since Jesus, then, lived up to the highest moral ideal ever conceived by man, He is the highest example for us. In Him we see what we ought to be. He is our religious as well as our moral example ; for, being a true man, He lived by prayer, dependence on God and worship, as we do. Readers will realize how impossible it would be to form such a conception as this in the case of the incarnations of Hinduism.

(4) But, since Jesus exhibited in character and life the moral ideal at its very height, He was also the revelation of God. When we say that God is ethical, we mean that He Himself conforms to the standard which He bids us live by ; but no religion, except Judaism and Christianity, has had the courage to say this frankly. It is the message of the Old Testament. It receives concrete expression in the character of Jesus, who, being the revelation of the Father, the express image of the righteous God, is also the example for men.

In Him the Indian incarnate ideal is more than fulfilled. The sketch of the divine character given by Hindu writers is here filled with a glory and a beauty they never dreamt of. And what the Hindu books declare to be impossible, namely, that the incarnate One should be a model to men, was actually accomplished by Jesus. In revealing the Father, He became our Exemplar. The chief points of character ascribed to the avatara are raised to glory in Him. He lived in the peace of His Father's arms, and sought to lead men to the same. The indifference to men, which is the Indian ideal, is in Him raised to that love for the human race which was the main spring of His life. His humility far surpasses anything told of Siva. Compassion showed itself in daily toil for the sick and the suffering. Tulsl Das and Manikka Vachakar make their heroes endure suffering for the sake of men ; but there is nothing in either poet to compare with the Cross of Christ.

(5) But strange to say, Jesus fulfils the Indian ascetic ideal

{438}

also. The main difference between Him and the Indian ascetic is that He did not seek suffering nor inflict pain upon Himself. Humiliation, contempt, slander, mockery, shame, desertion, treachery, hunger, thirst, pain, torture, death — all came to Him in the course of His daily endeavour to serve mankind. ' He was despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief.' ' Behold and see if there is any sorrow like unto his sorrow.' Yet all the meekness, gentleness, and forgiveness laid down as an ideal for the monk appear in actual fact in His daily life, the product of the love which inspired Him.

C. The incarnate God of Hinduism and Buddhism is a great teacher.

This aspect of the ideal is very weak in all the literature referring to Rama. In Valmiki's Ramayana he is no teacher at all ; the same is true of the late Rama Upanishads ; and in Tulsl Das, though here and there he gives religious advice, it scarcely amounts to teaching.

The original man-god Krishna of the second stage of the Mahdbhdrata is also no teacher : his work was the destruction of monsters. But in the Gltd the situation is very different. The god is no longer required to rid the earth of demons. A new need has arisen : the Vaishnava layman needs a theistic theology. Hence Krishna is transformed into a guru of the school of the Vedanta, and teaches the ancient lore of the Upanishads, with the addition, that he himself is Brahman incarnate. Hence he is called ' World-teacher, worshipful and most reverend.'1 In the Saddharma Pim- darika Gautama, transformed into an incarnate god, teaches as he actually did during life, only his message is new. It was probably the example of Krishna that led to the idea that Siva frequently appears on earth as a guru. Manikka Vachakar attributes his own conversion to a theophany of this type.

The Gltd has had an extraordinary influence in India for 1 xi. 43.

{439}

at least seventeen centuries, and the Saddharma Piindanka has played almost as great a role in China and Japan. But, while we venerate works which have touched men's hearts so deeply, we cannot read them to-day as the teaching of Krishna and Gautama. They are sisters, children of the same pregnant period, but the names of the great men who wrote them are altogether unknown.

In the Gospels, on the other hand, we have the undoubted teaching of Jesus of Nazareth. From Him came Christianity. So the ancient Romans tell us, and the Jews, as well as His own followers. Of the source of Christianity there is no more doubt than there is as to the source of Muhammadanism, of Buddhism, or of the system of Ramanuja.

Jesus conceives Himself as the World-teacher. He invites all to come and learn from Him. He makes His offers to everybody. His disciples are the salt of the earth, and the light of the world,1 and His Gospel will be preached throughout the world.2 There are no national limits in His teaching. He thinks of all men as children of God, and of God's love as blessing all men. When He sits as Judge, all the nations will be gathered before Him.:i

In the preceding chapters of this book we have seen some thing of the character and power of the teaching of Jesus, its spirituality, its universality, and the wonderful way in which it fits into the needs of modern India and crowns the noblest ideals of the old religion. As we have already seen, His teaching is distinguished from the teaching of all other religious leaders in this, that He lays down no detailed laws for our guidance, but merely states the universal spiritual principles which lie at the basis of human life and conduct.4 This is the secret of the fact that His moral and religious ideas are applicable in every country in the world and to men in all stages of civilization. Wherever a religion has undertaken to lay down a detailed religious law, it has thereby localized

[FOOTNOTE] 1 Matt. 5, 13-14. 2 Matt. 26, 13.

[FOOTNOTE] 3 Matt. 25, 31-32. 4 See above, pp. 58-59.

{440}

itself. No matter how excellent such laws may be, they cannot be applied to all the world. Conceive of Manu imposed on the Esquimaux, or the law of Moses given to a cannibal tribe in Central Africa. There is nothing in Christ's teaching that binds human freedom, nothing that offends against the laws of health, nothing that hinders simple human intercourse. He gives us the great principles, and each nation is left free to work out its own practice in harmony with the latest discoveries of science, and in such a way as to suit its own peculiar history and environment. Christ's teaching is universally applicable, and everywhere lays the foundations of freedom.

Every man may see the outcome of these facts in the world to-day. Christ's teaching is really preached in all the world. Indeed there is no race of men of any importance on earth that does not contain Christians. The message of Jesus has already proved itself universal in actual experience.

Although Jesus deals with universal principles, His words are supreme in their simplicity. His sentences are terse, epigrammatic, unforgettable. They are homely in the extreme, richly illustrated, parabolic. The consequence is that His teaching is utterly unlike any other piece of literature in the world. It is cast in such a form that it is universally comprehensible, even by men scarcely out of barbarism. This is the reason why the Gospels can be so readily trans lated into every language on earth. When translated, these books are not only intelligible to the simplest men : they retain the power of the original ; they are as mighty to touch human hearts, as potent in producing repentance and faith and holiness, as the original itself. Where is there in all the world another book that shows this universal adaptability and simplicity ? Imagine the Gltd and the ChJidndogya Upanisliad translated and put into the hands of the cannibals of New Guinea, the savages of Terra del Fuego, or even the Outcastes of India ! But the Gospels are actually known and treasured by men of these races, men who through Christ have escaped

{441}

from savagery. You may go and hear them read the Gospels at family prayers. Thus does Christ daily prove Himself in fact the Teacher of the human race.

D. The Incarnate comes to save.

In the earliest period of the doctrine the saving work of Rama and Krishna consists in killing monsters. Krishna kills Kamsa, the murderous king, Putana, the demon-nurse, and Kaliya, the snake-king. Rama kills the demon-king Ravana. It was the gods who required help against Ravana : it was as their Saviour that Vishnu became incarnate as the four sons of Dasaratha.

In the Gitd we have a much wider outlook. Krishna is represented as saying :

To save the righteous, to destroy evil-doers, to establish the law, I come into birth age after age.1

He now saves the righteous and establishes dharma 2 as well as destroys demons.

In the SaddJiarvia Pundarlka another step forward is taken. Destruction is dropped out of the task of the Incarnate. Gautama is represented as saying :

Repeatedly am I born in the world of the living. I am the Tathagata, the Lord, who has no superior, who appears in this world to save.3

There is the same point of view in Asvaghosha. To save all beings is said to be the aim of the Buddhas.4

Siva, as we have seen, does not become incarnate, but manifests himself in human form. In these theophanies Siva usually springs from a linga, or else takes the form of a Saiva guru ; but he may come in any guise. He appears either to teach or to help his devotees in need. Manikka Vachakar says :

Assuming diverse forms, and diverse habitudes, . . . Isa, Lord of the bull, that the world might be saved,— He and the Lady, His partner, — came in grace.6

[FOOTNOTE] 1 iv. 8. 2 Seep. 218. 3 5. B. E., xxi. 308 ; 124.

[FOOTNOTE] 4 Suzuki, 98. D Pope, 9.

{442}

Tulsl Das includes many things in the work of Rama, but he never represents him as a guru. Here is his statement of the reasons for his incarnation :

Whenever virtue decays, and evil spirits, waxing strong in pride, work iniquity that cannot be told, to the confusion of Brahmans, cows, gods, and earth itself, the compassionate Lord assumes some new bodily form, relieves the distress of the faithful ; destroys evil spirits ; rein states the gods ; maintains the way of salvation ; and diffuses the brightness of his glory throughout the world. Such are the motives of Rama's incarnations.1

He confesses frankly that Rama was no Saviour of men when he was on the earth ; but he declares that ' his name ' has saved millions :

Rama himself redeemed only one woman, the ascetic's wife ;2 but his name has corrected the errors of millions of sinners.3

These two last writers also introduce the touching thought of vicarious suffering. Manikka Vachakar says :

Thou mad'st me thine ; didst fiery poison eat, pitying poor souls ; That I might thine ambrosia taste, I meanest one ! 4

Tulsl Das :

From the love that he bore to his followers, Rama took the form of a man, and by himself enduring misery secured their happiness.5

It is very remarkable how the crude original idea of an incarnation, undertaken to rid the gods of an almost omni potent demon, was gradually purified in the course of the centuries. The advance in the Gitd is very great, but the highest thought of all is the vicarious suffering taught by the Tamil and Hindu saints.

From these fascinating imaginations we turn to the actual life of Jesus. At this point the most significant thing for us to notice is that the whole of His public life was one con tinuous piece of saving activity.

He was the first religious teacher to take up a healthy

[FOOTNOTE] 1 Growse, 63. 2 Namely Ahalya. See p. 298.

[FOOTNOTE] 3 Ib. 1 6. 4 Pope, 102. fl Growse, 16.

{443}

attitude to the human body. Me knew full well the value of the soul :

What shall it profit a man, if he sha'J gain the whole world, and lose his soul ? *

Yet he recognized the place of the body, as all modern thought does, and left us His example of loving care for it. He spent a great deal of time and energy in healing the body. All that modern science has got to say as to the importance of attending to our physical well-being is in accordance with the spirit of Jesus. All that we can do to bring medical aid to the sick, to introduce sanitation into Indian villages, to destroy the germs of disease, and to transform unhealthy con ditions, and all our plans for healthy physical exercise, for outdoor games, for drill and gymnastics, arc completely in accordance with His teaching and practice. India needs to learn to look after the body.

He sought to save human society, to make social inter course happy, healthy, pure, and free. Having the heart of a brother to every son of Adam, He was the most sociable and the most hospitable of men. He would not have people go hungry nor a festive occasion fail. This is the reason why He spread His table on the rich green grass of Bethsaida for more than five thousand guests. He knew well the deep influence exerted on character by every aspect of social life ; and, therefore, He wished to fill it with His own spirit of love. He wished to mould society as well as religion. He also used such occasions to win the hearts of those around Him, so as to draw them to His Father.

One of the chief aims Jesus had in view in His social life was the breaking down of social barriers, the actual establish ment in practice of the new social idea, that a man may honourably cat and drink with men of every race and of every social grade. How completely new, how explosively revolu tionary, this idea was then, every student of antiquity and of

{444}

India knows. Jesus was ready to sit down and eat with any one. He dined with wealthy men belonging to the strictest Jewish sect, the Pharisees ; He dined with those who were considered hopelessly beyond the pale of respectable or religious society.

But Jesus goes still further. To Him human society is a mystic, a divine thing, of incalculable influence ; our daily bread comes from our Father's hand ; food eaten in common, whether at a family meal or in some larger gathering, ought to bind us to one another as well as to the great Provider : its significance is inexhaustible. Hence He chose the last meal He had with His disciples to be the Memorial of His own dying Love, and to become the central and most precious element in Christian worship.

But Jesus came into the world to save men from sin ; and therefore the chief toil of His life was teaching, and the greatest of His acts was His redemptive death. Manikka Vachakar and TulsT Das realized that the Incarnate One in His compassion and love would suffer for the sake of men : Jesus fulfilled their thought on the Cross of Calvary. Every student of the Gospels realizes that in His death Jesus laid down his life deliberately, voluntarily, in full obedience to His Father's will, realizing that the Cross was needed to secure our emancipation from the chains of sin. His blood was the only possible ransom. It was shed for us. He died on the tree, fast bound to the sacrificial post, the victim slain for our transgressions. Great High Priest of the human race, He offered up Himself, at once High Priest and Sacrifice, that we, redeemed through His death, might share His life here and hereafter. As He hung on the Cross, His enemies said in mockery, ' He saved others : Himself He cannot save,' not realizing that their sarcasm was the highest possible praise, that they had, without knowing it or intending it, marked Him out, once and for ever, as the True Saviour.

=== Chapter XI (starts on p. 457)

{457}

V. We have already seen how Christ provides the fulfilment of each of the highest aspirations and aims of Hinduism.

{458}

A little reflection on the material contained in this chapter will show that every line of light which is visible in the grossest parts of the religion reappears in Him set in healthy institutions and spiritual worship. Every true motive which in Hinduism has found expression in unclean, debasing, or unworthy practices finds in Him fullest exercise in work for the downtrodden, the ignorant, the sick, and the sinful. In Him is focused every ray of light that shines in Hinduism. He is the Crown of the faith of India.