  CHAPTER III


  Arjuna.
  Thou whom all mortals praise, Janardana!
  If meditation be a nobler thing
  Than action, wherefore, then, great Kesava!
  Dost thou impel me to this dreadful fight?
  Now am I by thy doubtful speech disturbed!
  Tell me one thing, and tell me certainly;
  By what road shall I find the better end?

  Krishna.
  I told thee, blameless Lord! there be two paths
  Shown to this world; two schools of wisdom.

  First
  The Sankhya's, which doth save in way of works
  Prescribed[FN#4] by reason; next, the Yog, which bids
  Attain by meditation, spiritually:
  Yet these are one! No man shall 'scape from act
  By shunning action; nay, and none shall come
  By mere renouncements unto perfectness.
  Nay, and no jot of time, at any time,
  Rests any actionless; his nature's law
  Compels him, even unwilling, into act;
  [For thought is act in fancy]. He who sits
  Suppressing all the instruments of flesh,
  Yet in his idle heart thinking on them,
  Plays the inept and guilty hypocrite:
  But he who, with strong body serving mind,
  Gives up his mortal powers to worthy work,
  Not seeking gain, Arjuna! such an one
  Is honourable. Do thine allotted task!
  Work is more excellent than idleness;
  The body's life proceeds not, lacking work.
  There is a task of holiness to do,
  Unlike world-binding toil, which bindeth not
  The faithful soul; such earthly duty do
  Free from desire, and thou shalt well perform
  Thy heavenly purpose. Spake Prajapati--
  In the beginning, when all men were made,
  And, with mankind, the sacrifice-- "Do this!
  Work! sacrifice! Increase and multiply
  With sacrifice! This shall be Kamaduk,
  Your 'Cow of Plenty,' giving back her milk
  Of all abundance. Worship the gods thereby;
  The gods shall yield thee grace. Those meats ye crave
  The gods will grant to Labour, when it pays
  Tithes in the altar-flame. But if one eats
  Fruits of the earth, rendering to kindly Heaven
  No gift of toil, that thief steals from his world."

  Who eat of food after their sacrifice
  Are quit of fault, but they that spread a feast
  All for themselves, eat sin and drink of sin.
  By food the living live; food comes of rain,
  And rain comes by the pious sacrifice,
  And sacrifice is paid with tithes of toil;
  Thus action is of Brahma, who is One,
  The Only, All-pervading; at all times
  Present in sacrifice. He that abstains
  To help the rolling wheels of this great world,
  Glutting his idle sense, lives a lost life,
  Shameful and vain. Existing for himself,
  Self-concentrated, serving self alone,
  No part hath he in aught; nothing achieved,
  Nought wrought or unwrought toucheth him; no hope
  Of help for all the living things of earth
  Depends from him.[FN#5] Therefore, thy task prescribed
  With spirit unattached gladly perform,
  Since in performance of plain duty man
  Mounts to his highest bliss. By works alone
  Janak and ancient saints reached blessedness!
  Moreover, for the upholding of thy kind,
  Action thou should'st embrace. What the wise choose
  The unwise people take; what best men do
  The multitude will follow. Look on me,
  Thou Son of Pritha! in the three wide worlds
  I am not bound to any toil, no height
  Awaits to scale, no gift remains to gain,
  Yet I act here! and, if I acted not--
  Earnest and watchful--those that look to me
  For guidance, sinking back to sloth again
  Because I slumbered, would decline from good,
  And I should break earth's order and commit
  Her offspring unto ruin, Bharata!
  Even as the unknowing toil, wedded to sense,
  So let the enlightened toil, sense-freed, but set
  To bring the world deliverance, and its bliss;
  Not sowing in those simple, busy hearts
  Seed of despair. Yea! let each play his part
  In all he finds to do, with unyoked soul.
  All things are everywhere by Nature wrought
  In interaction of the qualities.
  The fool, cheated by self, thinks, "This I did"
  And "That I wrought; "but--ah, thou strong-armed Prince!--
  A better-lessoned mind, knowing the play
  Of visible things within the world of sense,
  And how the qualities must qualify,
  Standeth aloof even from his acts. Th' untaught
  Live mixed with them, knowing not Nature's way,
  Of highest aims unwitting, slow and dull.
  Those make thou not to stumble, having the light;
  But all thy dues discharging, for My sake,
  With meditation centred inwardly,
  Seeking no profit, satisfied, serene,
  Heedless of issue--fight! They who shall keep
  My ordinance thus, the wise and willing hearts,
  Have quittance from all issue of their acts;
  But those who disregard My ordinance,
  Thinking they know, know nought, and fall to loss,
  Confused and foolish. 'Sooth, the instructed one
  Doth of his kind, following what fits him most:
  And lower creatures of their kind; in vain
  Contending 'gainst the law. Needs must it be
  The objects of the sense will stir the sense
  To like and dislike, yet th' enlightened man
  Yields not to these, knowing them enemies.
  Finally, this is better, that one do
  His own task as he may, even though he fail,
  Than take tasks not his own, though they seem good.
  To die performing duty is no ill;
  But who seeks other roads shall wander still.

  Arjuna.
  Yet tell me, Teacher! by what force doth man
  Go to his ill, unwilling; as if one
  Pushed him that evil path?

  Krishna.
  Kama it is!
  Passion it is! born of the Darknesses,
  Which pusheth him. Mighty of appetite,
  Sinful, and strong is this!--man's enemy!
  As smoke blots the white fire, as clinging rust
  Mars the bright mirror, as the womb surrounds
  The babe unborn, so is the world of things
  Foiled, soiled, enclosed in this desire of flesh.
  The wise fall, caught in it; the unresting foe
  It is of wisdom, wearing countless forms,
  Fair but deceitful, subtle as a flame.
  Sense, mind, and reason--these, O Kunti's Son!
  Are booty for it; in its play with these
  It maddens man, beguiling, blinding him.
  Therefore, thou noblest child of Bharata!
  Govern thy heart! Constrain th' entangled sense!
  Resist the false, soft sinfulness which saps
  Knowledge and judgment! Yea, the world is strong,
  But what discerns it stronger, and the mind
  Strongest; and high o'er all the ruling Soul.
  Wherefore, perceiving Him who reigns supreme,
  Put forth full force of Soul in thy own soul!
  Fight! vanquish foes and doubts, dear Hero! slay
  What haunts thee in fond shapes, and would betray!

  HERE ENDETH CHAPTER III. OF THE BHAGAVAD-GITA,
  Entitled "Karma-Yog,"
  Or "The Book of Virtue in Work."





  CHAPTER XII


  Arjuna.
  Lord! of the men who serve Thee--true in heart--
  As God revealed; and of the men who serve,
  Worshipping Thee Unrevealed, Unbodied, Far,
  Which take the better way of faith and life?

  Krishna.
  Whoever serve Me--as I show Myself--
  Constantly true, in full devotion fixed,
  Those hold I very holy. But who serve--
  Worshipping Me The One, The Invisible,
  The Unrevealed, Unnamed, Unthinkable,
  Uttermost, All-pervading, Highest, Sure--
  Who thus adore Me, mastering their sense,
  Of one set mind to all, glad in all good,
  These blessed souls come unto Me.

  Yet, hard
  The travail is for such as bend their minds
  To reach th' Unmanifest That viewless path
  Shall scarce be trod by man bearing the flesh!
  But whereso any doeth all his deeds
  Renouncing self for Me, full of Me, fixed
  To serve only the Highest, night and day
  Musing on Me--him will I swiftly lift
  Forth from life's ocean of distress and death,
  Whose soul clings fast to Me. Cling thou to Me!
  Clasp Me with heart and mind! so shalt thou dwell
  Surely with Me on high. But if thy thought
  Droops from such height; if thou be'st weak to set
  Body and soul upon Me constantly,
  Despair not! give Me lower service! seek
  To reach Me, worshipping with steadfast will;
  And, if thou canst not worship steadfastly,
  Work for Me, toil in works pleasing to Me!
  For he that laboureth right for love of Me
  Shall finally attain! But, if in this
  Thy faint heart fails, bring Me thy failure! find
  Refuge in Me! let fruits of labour go,
  Renouncing hope for Me, with lowliest heart,
  So shalt thou come; for, though to know is more
  Than diligence, yet worship better is
  Than knowing, and renouncing better still.
  Near to renunciation--very near--
  Dwelleth Eternal Peace!

  Who hateth nought
  Of all which lives, living himself benign,
  Compassionate, from arrogance exempt,
  Exempt from love of self, unchangeable
  By good or ill; patient, contented, firm
  In faith, mastering himself, true to his word,
  Seeking Me, heart and soul; vowed unto Me,--
  That man I love! Who troubleth not his kind,
  And is not troubled by them; clear of wrath,
  Living too high for gladness, grief, or fear,
  That man I love! Who, dwelling quiet-eyed,[FN#25]
  Stainless, serene, well-balanced, unperplexed,
  Working with Me, yet from all works detached,
  That man I love! Who, fixed in faith on Me,
  Dotes upon none, scorns none; rejoices not,
  And grieves not, letting good or evil hap
  Light when it will, and when it will depart,
  That man I love! Who, unto friend and foe
  Keeping an equal heart, with equal mind
  Bears shame and glory; with an equal peace
  Takes heat and cold, pleasure and pain; abides
  Quit of desires, hears praise or calumny
  In passionless restraint, unmoved by each;
  Linked by no ties to earth, steadfast in Me,
  That man I love! But most of all I love
  Those happy ones to whom 'tis life to live
  In single fervid faith and love unseeing,
  Drinking the blessed Amrit of my Being!

  HERE ENDETH CHAPTER XII. OF THE BHAGAVAD-GITA,
  Entitled "Bhaktiyog,"
  Or"The Book of the Religion of Faith."





  CHAPTER XVIII


  Arjuna.
  Fain would I better know, Thou Glorious One!
  The very truth--Heart's Lord!--of Sannyas,
  Abstention; and  enunciation, Lord!
  Tyaga; and what separates these twain!

  Krishna.
  The poets rightly teach that Sannyas
  Is the foregoing of all acts which spring
  Out of desire; and their wisest say
  Tyaga is renouncing fruit of acts.

  There be among the saints some who have held
  All action sinful, and to be renounced;
  And some who answer, "Nay! the goodly acts--
  As worship, penance, alms--must be performed!"
  Hear now My sentence, Best of Bharatas!

  'Tis well set forth, O Chaser of thy Foes!
  Renunciation is of threefold form,
  And Worship, Penance, Alms, not to be stayed;
  Nay, to be gladly done; for all those three
  Are purifying waters for true souls!

  Yet must be practised even those high works
  In yielding up attachment, and all fruit
  Produced by works. This is My judgment, Prince!
  This My insuperable and fixed decree!

  Abstaining from a work by right prescribed
  Never is meet! So to abstain doth spring
  From "Darkness," and Delusion teacheth it.
  Abstaining from a work grievous to flesh,
  When one saith "'Tis unpleasing!" this is null!
  Such an one acts from "passion;" nought of gain
  Wins his Renunciation! But, Arjun!
  Abstaining from attachment to the work,
  Abstaining from rewardment in the work,
  While yet one doeth it full faithfully,
  Saying, "Tis right to do!" that is "true " act
  And abstinence! Who doeth duties so,
  Unvexed if his work fail, if it succeed
  Unflattered, in his own heart justified,
  Quit of debates and doubts, his is "true" act:
  For, being in the body, none may stand
  Wholly aloof from act; yet, who abstains
  From profit of his acts is abstinent.

  The fruit of labours, in the lives to come,
  Is threefold for all men,--Desirable,
  And Undesirable, and mixed of both;
  But no fruit is at all where no work was.

  Hear from me, Long-armed Lord! the makings five
  Which go to every act, in Sankhya taught
  As necessary. First the force; and then
  The agent; next, the various instruments;
  Fourth, the especial effort; fifth, the God.
  What work soever any mortal doth
  Of body, mind, or speech, evil or good,
  By these five doth he that. Which being thus,
  Whoso, for lack of knowledge, seeth himself
  As the sole actor, knoweth nought at all
  And seeth nought. Therefore, I say, if one--
  Holding aloof from self--with unstained mind
  Should slay all yonder host, being bid to slay,
  He doth not slay; he is not bound thereby!

  Knowledge, the thing known, and the mind which knows,
  These make the threefold starting-ground of act.
  The act, the actor, and the instrument,
  These make the threefold total of the deed.
  But knowledge, agent, act, are differenced
  By three dividing qualities. Hear now
  Which be the qualities dividing them.

  There is "true" Knowledge. Learn thou it is this:
  To see one changeless Life in all the Lives,
  And in the Separate, One Inseparable.
  There is imperfect Knowledge: that which sees
  The separate existences apart,
  And, being separated, holds them real.
  There is false Knowledge: that which blindly clings
  To one as if 'twere all, seeking no Cause,
  Deprived of light, narrow, and dull, and "dark."

  There is "right" Action: that which being enjoined--
  Is wrought without attachment, passionlessly,
  For duty, not for love, nor hate, nor gain.
  There is "vain" Action: that which men pursue
  Aching to satisfy desires, impelled
  By sense of self, with all-absorbing stress:
  This is of Rajas--passionate and vain.
  There is "dark" Action: when one doth a thing
  Heedless of issues, heedless of the hurt
  Or wrong for others, heedless if he harm
  His own soul--'tis of Tamas, black and bad!

  There is the "rightful"doer. He who acts
  Free from self-seeking, humble, resolute,
  Steadfast, in good or evil hap the same,
  Content to do aright-he "truly" acts.
  There is th' "impassioned" doer. He that works
  From impulse, seeking profit, rude and bold
  To overcome, unchastened; slave by turns
  Of sorrow and of joy: of Rajas he!
  And there be evil doers; loose of heart,
  Low-minded, stubborn, fraudulent, remiss,
  Dull, slow, despondent--children of the "dark."

  Hear, too, of Intellect and Steadfastness
  The threefold separation, Conqueror-Prince!
  How these are set apart by Qualities.

  Good is the Intellect which comprehends
  The coming forth and going back of life,
  What must be done, and what must not be done,
  What should be feared, and what should not be feared,
  What binds and what emancipates the soul:
  That is of Sattwan, Prince! of "soothfastness."
  Marred is the Intellect which, knowing right
  And knowing wrong, and what is well to do
  And what must not be done, yet understands
  Nought with firm mind, nor as the calm truth is:
  This is of Rajas, Prince! and "passionate!"
  Evil is Intellect which, wrapped in gloom,
  Looks upon wrong as right, and sees all things
  Contrariwise of Truth. O Pritha's Son!
  That is of Tamas, "dark" and desperate!

  Good is the steadfastness whereby a man
  Masters his beats of heart, his very breath
  Of life, the action of his senses; fixed
  In never-shaken faith and piety:
  That is of Sattwan, Prince! "soothfast" and fair!
  Stained is the steadfastness whereby a man
  Holds to his duty, purpose, effort, end,
  For life's sake, and the love of goods to gain,
  Arjuna! 'tis of Rajas, passion-stamped!
  Sad is the steadfastness wherewith the fool
  Cleaves to his sloth, his sorrow, and his fears,
  His folly and despair. This--Pritha's Son!--
  Is born of Tamas, "dark" and miserable!


  Hear further, Chief of Bharatas! from Me
  The threefold kinds of Pleasure which there be.

  Good Pleasure is the pleasure that endures,
  Banishing pain for aye; bitter at first
  As poison to the soul, but afterward
  Sweet as the taste of Amrit. Drink of that!
  It springeth in the Spirit's deep content.
  And painful Pleasure springeth from the bond
  Between the senses and the sense-world. Sweet
  As Amrit is its first taste, but its last
  Bitter as poison. 'Tis of Rajas, Prince!
  And foul and "dark" the Pleasure is which springs
  From sloth and sin and foolishness; at first
  And at the last, and all the way of life
  The soul bewildering. 'Tis of Tamas, Prince!

  For nothing lives on earth, nor 'midst the gods
  In utmost heaven, but hath its being bound
  With these three Qualities, by Nature framed.

  The work of Brahmans, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas,
  And Sudras, O thou Slayer of thy Foes!
  Is fixed by reason of the Qualities
  Planted in each:

  A Brahman's virtues, Prince!
  Born of his nature, are serenity,
  Self-mastery, religion, purity,
  Patience, uprightness, learning, and to know
  The truth of things which be. A Kshatriya's pride,
  Born of his nature, lives in valour, fire,
  Constancy, skilfulness, spirit in fight,
  And open-handedness and noble mien,
  As of a lord of men. A Vaisya's task,
  Born with his nature, is to till the ground,
  Tend cattle, venture trade. A Sudra's state,
  Suiting his nature, is to minister.

  Whoso performeth--diligent, content--
  The work allotted him, whate'er it be,
  Lays hold of perfectness! Hear how a man
  Findeth perfection, being so content:
  He findeth it through worship--wrought by work--
  Of Him that is the Source of all which lives,
  Of HIM by Whom the universe was stretched.

  Better thine own work is, though done with fault,
  Than doing others' work, ev'n excellently.
  He shall not fall in sin who fronts the task
  Set him by Nature's hand! Let no man leave
  His natural duty, Prince! though it bear blame!
  For every work hath blame, as every flame
  Is wrapped in smoke! Only that man attains
  Perfect surcease of work whose work was wrought
  With mind unfettered, soul wholly subdued,
  Desires for ever dead, results renounced.

  Learn from me, Son of Kunti! also this,
  How one, attaining perfect peace, attains
  BRAHM, the supreme, the highest height of all!

  Devoted--with a heart grown pure, restrained
  In lordly self-control, forgoing wiles
  Of song and senses, freed from love and hate,
  Dwelling 'mid solitudes, in diet spare,
  With body, speech, and will tamed to obey,
  Ever to holy meditation vowed,
  From passions liberate, quit of the Self,
  Of arrogance, impatience, anger, pride;
  Freed from surroundings, quiet, lacking nought--
  Such an one grows to oneness with the BRAHM;
  Such an one, growing one with BRAHM, serene,
  Sorrows no more, desires no more; his soul,
  Equally loving all that lives, loves well
  Me, Who have made them, and attains to Me.
  By this same love and worship doth he know
  Me as I am, how high and wonderful,
  And knowing, straightway enters into Me.
  And whatsoever deeds he doeth--fixed
  In Me, as in his refuge--he hath won
  For ever and for ever by My grace
  Th' Eternal Rest! So win thou! In thy thoughts
  Do all thou dost for Me! Renounce for Me!
  Sacrifice heart and mind and will to Me!
  Live in the faith of Me! In faith of Me
  All dangers thou shalt vanquish, by My grace;
  But, trusting to thyself and heeding not,
  Thou can'st but perish! If this day thou say'st,
  Relying on thyself, "I will not fight!"
  Vain will the purpose prove! thy qualities
  Would spur thee to the war. What thou dost shun,
  Misled by fair illusions, thou wouldst seek
  Against thy will, when the task comes to thee
  Waking the promptings in thy nature set.
  There lives a Master in the hearts of men
  Maketh their deeds, by subtle  pulling--strings,
  Dance to what tune HE will. With all thy soul
  Trust Him, and take Him for thy succour, Prince!
  So--only so, Arjuna!--shalt thou gain--
  By grace of Him--the uttermost repose,
  The Eternal Place!

  Thus hath been opened thee
  This Truth of Truths, the Mystery more hid
  Than any secret mystery. Meditate!
  And--as thou wilt--then act!

  Nay! but once more
  Take My last word, My utmost meaning have!
  Precious thou art to Me; right well-beloved!
  Listen! I tell thee for thy comfort this.
  Give Me thy heart! adore Me! serve Me! cling
  In faith and love and reverence to Me!
  So shalt thou come to Me! I promise true,
  For thou art sweet to Me!

  And let go those--
  Rites and writ duties! Fly to Me alone!
  Make Me thy single refuge! I will free
  Thy soul from all its  sins! Be of good cheer!

  [Hide, the holy Krishna saith,
  This from him that hath no faith,
  Him that worships not, nor seeks
  Wisdom's teaching when she speaks:
  Hide it from all men who mock;
  But, wherever, 'mid the flock
  Of My lovers, one shall teach
  This  divinest, wisest, speech--
  Teaching in the faith to bring
  Truth to them, and offering
  Of all honour unto Me--
  Unto Brahma cometh he!
  Nay, and nowhere shall ye find
  Any man of all mankind
  Doing dearer deed for Me;
  Nor shall any dearer be
  In My earth. Yea, furthermore,
  Whoso reads this converse o'er,
  Held by Us upon the plain,
  Pondering piously and fain,
  He hath paid Me sacrifice!
  (Krishna speaketh in this wise!)
  Yea, and whoso, full of faith,
  Heareth wisely what it saith,
  Heareth meekly,--when he dies,
  Surely shall his spirit rise
  To those regions where the Blest,
  Free of flesh, in joyance rest.]

  Hath this been heard by thee, O Indian Prince!
  With mind intent? hath all the ignorance--
  Which bred thy trouble--vanished, My Arjun?

  Arjuna.
  Trouble and ignorance are gone! the Light
  Hath come unto me, by Thy favour, Lord!
  Now am I fixed! my doubt is fled away!
  According to Thy word, so will I do!

  Sanjaya.
  Thus gathered I the gracious speech of Krishna, O my King!
  Thus have I told, with heart a-thrill, this wise and wondrous thing
  By great Vyasa's learning writ, how Krishna's self made known
  The Yoga, being Yoga's Lord. So is the high truth shown!
  And aye, when I remember, O Lord my King, again
  Arjuna and the God in talk, and all this holy strain,
  Great is my gladness: when I muse that splendour, passing speech,
  Of Hari, visible and plain, there is no tongue to reach
  My marvel and my love and bliss. O Archer-Prince! all hail!
  O Krishna, Lord of Yoga! surely there shall not fail
  Blessing, and victory, and power, for Thy most mighty sake,
  Where this song comes of Arjun, and how with God he spake.

  HERE ENDS, WITH CHAPTER XVIII.,
  Entitled "Mokshasanyasayog,"
  Or "The Book of Religion by Deliverance and Renunciation,"
  THE BHAGAVAD-GITA.




[FN#1]  Some repetitionary lines are here omitted.

[FN#2]  Technical phrases of Vedic religion.

[FN#3]  The whole of this passage is highly involved and difficult to
render.

[FN#4]  I feel convinced sankhyanan and yoginan must be transposed
here in sense.

[FN#5]  I am doubtful of accuracy here.

[FN#6]  A name of the sun.

[FN#7]  Without desire of fruit.

[FN#8]  That is,"joy and sorrow, success and failure, heat and cold,"&c.

[FN#9]  i.e., the body.

[FN#10]  The Sanskrit has this play on the double meaning of Atman.

[FN#11]  So in original.

[FN#12]  Beings of low and devilish nature.

[FN#13]  Krishna.

[FN#14]  I read here janma, "birth;" not jara,"age"

[FN#15]  I have discarded ten lines of Sanskrit text here as an
undoubted interpolation by some Vedantist

[FN#16]  The Sanskrit poem here rises to an elevation of style and
manner which I have endeavoured to mark by change of metre.

[FN#17]  Ahinsa.

[FN#18]  The nectar of immortality.

[FN#19]  Called "The Jap."

[FN#20]  The compound form of Sanskrit words.

[FN#21]  "Kamalapatraksha"

[FN#22]  These are all divine or deified orders of the Hindoo Pantheon.

[FN#23]  "Hail to Thee, God of Gods! Be favourable!"

[FN#24]  The wind.

[FN#25]  "Not peering about,"anapeksha.

[FN#26]  The Calcutta edition of the Mahabharata has these three
opening lines.

[FN#27]  This is the nearest possible version of
Kshetrakshetrajnayojnanan yat tajnan matan mama.

[FN#28]  I omit two lines of the Sanskrit here, evidently interpolated by
some Vedantist.

[FN#29]  Wombs.

[FN#30]  I do not consider the Sanskrit verses here-which are somewhat
freely rendered--"an attack on the authority of the Vedas," with Mr
Davies, but a beautiful lyrical episode, a new "Parable of the fig-tree."

[FN#31]  I omit a verse here, evidently interpolated.

[FN#32]  "Of the Asuras," lit.

[FN#33]  I omit the ten concluding shlokas, with Mr Davis.

[FN#34]  Rakshasas and Yakshas are unembodied but capricious beings
of great power, gifts, and beauty, same times also of benignity.

[FN#35]  These are spirits of evil wandering ghosts.

[FN#36]  Yatayaman, food which has remained after the watches of the
night. In India this would probably "go bad."

[FN#37]  I omit the concluding shlokas, as of very doubtful authenticity.











